<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 31</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-31" epub:type="chapter">
<h2>WESTBOTTOM AND LAPLAND</h2>

<h4 id="id02479" style="margin-top: 2em">THE FIVE SCOUTS</h4>

<p id="id02480">Once, at Skansen, the boy had sat under the steps at Bollnäs cottage and
had overheard Clement Larsson and the old Laplander talk about Norrland.
Both agreed that it was the most beautiful part of Sweden. Clement
thought that the southern part was the best, while the Laplander
favoured the northern part.</p>

<p id="id02481">As they argued, it became plain that Clement had never been farther
north than Härnösand. The Laplander laughed at him for speaking with
such assurance of places that he had never seen.</p>

<p id="id02482">"I think I shall have to tell you a story, Clement, to give you some
idea of Lapland, since you have not seen it," volunteered the Laplander.</p>

<p id="id02483">"It shall not be said of me that I refuse to listen to a story,"
retorted Clement, and the old Laplander began:</p>

<p id="id02484">"It once happened that the birds who lived down in Sweden, south of the
great Saméland, thought that they were overcrowded there and suggested
moving northward.</p>

<p id="id02485">"They came together to consider the matter. The young and eager birds
wished to start at once, but the older and wiser ones passed a
resolution to send scouts to explore the new country.</p>

<p id="id02486">"'Let each of the five great bird families send out a scout,' said the
old and wise birds, 'to learn if there is room for us all up there—food
and hiding places.'</p>

<p id="id02487">"Five intelligent and capable birds were immediately appointed by the
five great bird families.</p>

<p id="id02488">"The forest birds selected a grouse, the field birds a lark, the sea
birds a gull, the fresh-water birds a loon, and the cliff birds a snow
sparrow.</p>

<p id="id02489">"When the five chosen ones were ready to start, the grouse, who was the
largest and most commanding, said:</p>

<p id="id02490">"'There are great stretches of land ahead. If we travel together, it
will be long before we cover all the territory that we must explore. If,
on the other hand, we travel singly—each one exploring his special
portion of the country—the whole business can be accomplished in a few
days.'</p>

<p id="id02491">"The other scouts thought the suggestion a good one, and agreed to act
upon it.</p>

<p id="id02492">"It was decided that the grouse should explore the midlands. The lark
was to travel to the eastward, the sea gull still farther east, where
the land bordered on the sea, while the loon should fly over the
territory west of the midlands, and the snow sparrow to the extreme
west.</p>

<p id="id02493">"In accordance with this plan, the five birds flew over the whole
Northland. Then they turned back and told the assembly of birds what
they had discovered.</p>

<p id="id02494">"The gull, who had travelled along the sea-coast, spoke first.</p>

<p id="id02495">"'The North is a fine country,' he said. 'The sounds are full of fish,
and there are points and islands without number. Most of these are
uninhabited, and the birds will find plenty of room there. The humans
do a little fishing and sailing in the sounds, but not enough to disturb
the birds. If the sea birds follow my advice, they will move north
immediately.'</p>

<p id="id02496">"When the gull had finished, the lark, who had explored the land back
from the coast, spoke:</p>

<p id="id02497">"'I don't know what the gull means by his islands and points,' said the
lark. I have travelled only over great fields and flowery meadows. I
have never before seen a country crossed by some large streams. Their
shores are dotted with homesteads, and at the mouth of the rivers are
cities; but for the most part the country is very desolate. If the field
birds follow my advice, they will move north immediately.'</p>

<p id="id02498">"After the lark came the grouse, who had flown over the midlands.</p>

<p id="id02499">"'I know neither what the lark means with his meadows nor the gull with
his islands and points,' said he. 'I have seen only pine forests on this
whole trip. There are also many rushing streams and great stretches of
moss-grown swamp land; but all that is not river or swamp is forest. If
the forest birds follow my advice, they will move north immediately.'</p>

<p id="id02500">"After the grouse came the loon, who had explored the borderland to the
west.</p>

<p id="id02501">"I don't know what the grouse means by his forests, nor do I know where
the eyes of the lark and the gull could have been,' remarked the loon.
There's hardly any land up there—only big lakes. Between beautiful
shores glisten clear, blue mountain lakes, which pour into roaring
water-falls. If the fresh-water birds follow my advice, they will move
north immediately.'</p>

<p id="id02502">"The last speaker was the snow sparrow, who had flown along the western
boundary.</p>

<p id="id02503">"'I don't know what the loon means by his lakes, nor do I know what
countries the grouse, the lark, and the gull can have seen,' he said. 'I
found one vast mountainous region up north. I didn't run across any
fields or any pine forests, but peak after peak and highlands. I have
seen ice fields and snow and mountain brooks, with water as white as
milk. No farmers nor cattle nor homesteads have I seen, but only Lapps
and reindeer and huts met my eyes. If the cliff birds follow my advice,
they will move north immediately.'</p>

<p id="id02504">"When the five scouts had presented their reports to the assembly, they
began to call one another liars, and were ready to fly at each other to
prove the truth of their arguments.</p>

<p id="id02505">"But the old and wise birds who had sent them out, listened to their
accounts with joy, and calmed their fighting propensities.</p>

<p id="id02506">"'You mustn't quarrel among yourselves,' they said. 'We understand from
your reports that up north there are large mountain tracts, a big lake
region, great forest lands, a wide plain, and a big group of islands.
This is more than we have expected—more than many a mighty kingdom can
boast within its borders.'"</p>

<h5 id="id02507">THE MOVING LANDSCAPE</h5>

<p id="id02508"><i>Saturday, June eighteenth</i>.</p>

<p id="id02509">The boy had been reminded of the old Laplander's story because he
himself was now travelling over the country of which he had spoken. The
eagle told him that the expanse of coast which spread beneath them was
Westbottom, and that the blue ridges far to the west were in Lapland.</p>

<p id="id02510">Only to be once more seated comfortably on Gorgo's back, after all that
he had suffered during the forest fire, was a pleasure. Besides, they
were having a fine trip. The flight was so easy that at times it seemed
as if they were standing still in the air. The eagle beat and beat his
wings, without appearing to move from the spot; on the other hand,
everything under them seemed in motion. The whole earth and all things
on it moved slowly southward. The forests, the fields, the fences, the
rivers, the cities, the islands, the sawmills—all were on the march.
The boy wondered whither they were bound. Had they grown tired of
standing so far north, and wished to move toward the south?</p>

<p id="id02511">Amid all the objects in motion there was only one that stood still: that
was a railway train. It stood directly under them, for it was with the
train as with Gorgo—it could not move from the spot. The locomotive
sent forth smoke and sparks. The clatter of the wheels could be heard
all the way up to the boy, but the train did not seem to move. The
forests rushed by; the flag station rushed by; fences and telegraph
poles rushed by; but the train stood still. A broad river with a long
bridge came toward it, but the river and the bridge glided along under
the train with perfect ease. Finally a railway station appeared. The
station master stood on the platform with his red flag, and moved slowly
toward the train.</p>

<p id="id02512">When he waved his little flag, the locomotive belched even darker smoke
curls than before, and whistled mournfully because it had to stand
still. All of a sudden it began to move toward the south, like
everything else.</p>

<p id="id02513">The boy saw all the coach doors open and the passengers step out while
both cars and people were moving southward.</p>

<p id="id02514">He glanced away from the earth and tried to look straight ahead. Staring
at the queer railway train had made him dizzy; but after he had gazed
for a moment at a little white cloud, he was tired of that and looked
down again—thinking all the while that the eagle and himself were quite
still and that everything else was travelling on south. Fancy! Suppose
the grain field just then running along under him—which must have been
newly sown for he had seen a green blade on it—were to travel all the
way down to Skåne where the rye was in full bloom at this season!</p>

<p id="id02515">Up here the pine forests were different: the trees were bare, the
branches short and the needles were almost black. Many trees were bald
at the top and looked sickly. If a forest like that were to journey down
to Kolmården and see a real forest, how inferior it would feel!</p>

<p id="id02516">The gardens which he now saw had some pretty bushes, but no fruit trees
or lindens or chestnut trees—only mountain ash and birch. There were
some vegetable beds, but they were not as yet hoed or planted.</p>

<p id="id02517">"If such an apology for a garden were to come trailing into Sörmland,
the province of gardens, wouldn't it think itself a poor wilderness by
comparison?"</p>

<p id="id02518">Imagine an immense plain like the one now gliding beneath him, coming
under the very eyes of the poor Småland peasants! They would hurry away
from their meagre garden plots and stony fields, to begin plowing and
sowing.</p>

<p id="id02519">There was one thing, however, of which this Northland had more than
other lands, and that was light. Night must have set in, for the cranes
stood sleeping on the morass; but it was as light as day. The sun had
not travelled southward, like every other thing. Instead, it had gone so
far north that it shone in the boy's face. To all appearance, it had no
notion of setting that night.</p>

<p id="id02520">If this light and this sun were only shining on West Vemmenhög! It would
suit the boy's father and mother to a dot to have a working day that
lasted twenty-four hours.</p>

<p id="id02521"><i>Sunday, June nineteenth</i>.</p>

<p id="id02522">The boy raised his head and looked around, perfectly bewildered. It was
mighty queer! Here he lay sleeping in some place where he had not been
before. No, he had never seen this glen nor the mountains round about;
and never had he noticed such puny and shrunken birches as those under
which he now lay.</p>

<p id="id02523">Where was the eagle? The boy could see no sign of him. Gorgo must have
deserted him. Well, here was another adventure!</p>

<p id="id02524">The boy lay down again, closed his eyes, and tried to recall the
circumstances under which he had dropped to sleep.</p>

<p id="id02525">He remembered that as long as he was travelling over Westbottom he had
fancied that the eagle and he were at a standstill in the air, and that
the land under them was moving southward. As the eagle turned northwest,
the wind had come from that side, and again he had felt a current of
air, so that the land below had stopped moving and he had noticed that
the eagle was bearing him onward with terrific speed.</p>

<p id="id02526">"Now we are flying into Lapland," Gorgo had said, and the boy had bent
forward, so that he might see the country of which he had heard so much.</p>

<p id="id02527">But he had felt rather disappointed at not seeing anything but great
tracts of forest land and wide marshes. Forest followed marsh and marsh
followed forest. The monotony of the whole finally made him so sleepy
that he had nearly dropped to the ground.</p>

<p id="id02528">He said to the eagle that he could not stay on his back another minute,
but must sleep awhile. Gorgo had promptly swooped to the ground, where
the boy had dropped down on a moss tuft. Then Gorgo put a talon around
him and soared into the air with him again.</p>

<p id="id02529">"Go to sleep, Thumbietot!" he cried. "The sunshine keeps me awake and I
want to continue the journey."</p>

<p id="id02530">Although the boy hung in this uncomfortable position, he actually dozed
and dreamed.</p>

<p id="id02531">He dreamed that he was on a broad road in southern Sweden, hurrying
along as fast as his little legs could carry him. He was not alone, many
wayfarers were tramping in the same direction. Close beside him marched
grain-filled rye blades, blossoming corn flowers, and yellow daisies.
Heavily laden apple trees went puffing along, followed by vine-covered
bean stalks, big clusters of white daisies, and masses of berry bushes.
Tall beeches and oaks and lindens strolled leisurely in the middle of
the road, their branches swaying, and they stepped aside for none.
Between the boy's tiny feet darted the little flowers—wild strawberry
blossoms, white anemones, clover, and forget-me-nots. At first he
thought that only the vegetable family was on the march, but presently
he saw that animals and people accompanied them. The insects were
buzzing around advancing bushes, the fishes were swimming in moving
ditches, the birds were singing in strolling trees. Both tame and wild
beasts were racing, and amongst all this people moved along—some with
spades and scythes, others with axes, and others, again, with fishing
nets.</p>

<p id="id02532">The procession marched with gladness and gayety, and he did not wonder
at that when he saw who was leading it. It was nothing less than the Sun
itself that rolled on like a great shining head with hair of many-hued
rays and a countenance beaming with merriment and kindliness!</p>

<p id="id02533">"Forward, march!" it kept calling out. "None need feel anxious whilst I
am here. Forward, march!"</p>

<p id="id02534">"I wonder where the Sun wants to take us to?" remarked the boy. A rye
blade that walked beside him heard him, and immediately answered:</p>

<p id="id02535">"He wants to take us up to Lapland to fight the Ice Witch."</p>

<p id="id02536">Presently the boy noticed that some of the travellers hesitated, slowed
up, and finally stood quite still. He saw that the tall beech tree
stopped, and that the roebuck and the wheat blade tarried by the
wayside, likewise the blackberry bush, the little yellow buttercup, the
chestnut tree, and the grouse.</p>

<p id="id02537">He glanced about him and tried to reason out why so many stopped. Then
he discovered that they were no longer in southern Sweden. The march had
been so rapid that they were already in Svealand.</p>

<p id="id02538">Up there the oak began to move more cautiously. It paused awhile to
consider, took a few faltering steps, then came to a standstill.</p>

<p id="id02539">"Why doesn't the oak come along?" asked the boy.</p>

<p id="id02540">"It's afraid of the Ice Witch," said a fair young birch that tripped
along so boldly and cheerfully that it was a joy to watch it. The crowd
hurried on as before. In a short time they were in Norrland, and now it
mattered not how much the Sun cried and coaxed—the apple tree stopped,
the cherry tree stopped, the rye blade stopped!</p>

<p id="id02541">The boy turned to them and asked:</p>

<p id="id02542">"Why don't you come along? Why do you desert the Sun?"</p>

<p id="id02543">"We dare not! We're afraid of the Ice Witch, who lives in Lapland," they
answered.</p>

<p id="id02544">The boy comprehended that they were far north, as the procession grew
thinner and thinner. The rye blade, the barley, the wild strawberry, the
blueberry bush, the pea stalk, the currant bush had come along as far as
this. The elk and the domestic cow had been walking side by side, but
now they stopped. The Sun no doubt would have been almost deserted if
new followers had not happened along. Osier bushes and a lot of brushy
vegetation joined the procession. Laps and reindeer, mountain owl and
mountain fox and willow grouse followed.</p>

<p id="id02545">Then the boy heard something coming toward them. He saw great rivers and
creeks sweeping along with terrible force.</p>

<p id="id02546">"Why are they in such a hurry?" he asked.</p>

<p id="id02547">"They are running away from the Ice Witch, who lives up in the
mountains."</p>

<p id="id02548">All of a sudden the boy saw before him a high, dark, turreted wall.
Instantly the Sun turned its beaming face toward this wall and flooded
it with light. Then it became apparent that it was no wall, but the most
glorious mountains, which loomed up—one behind another. Their peaks
were rose-coloured in the sunlight, their slopes azure and gold-tinted.</p>

<p id="id02549">"Onward, onward!" urged the Sun as it climbed the steep cliffs. "There's
no danger so long as I am with you."</p>

<p id="id02550">But half way up, the bold young birch deserted—also the sturdy pine and
the persistent spruce, and there, too, the Laplander, and the willow
brush deserted. At last, when the Sun reached the top, there was no one
but the little tot, Nils Holgersson, who had followed it.</p>

<p id="id02551">The Sun rolled into a cave, where the walls were bedecked with ice, and
Nils Holgersson wanted to follow, but farther than the opening of the
cave he dared not venture, for in there he saw something dreadful.</p>

<p id="id02552">Far back in the cave sat an old witch with an ice body, hair of icicles,
and a mantle of snow!</p>

<p id="id02553">At her feet lay three black wolves, who rose and opened their jaws when
the Sun approached. From the mouth of one came a piercing cold, from the
second a blustering north wind, and from the third came impenetrable
darkness.</p>

<p id="id02554">"That must be the Ice Witch and her tribe," thought the boy.</p>

<p id="id02555">He understood that now was the time for him to flee, but he was so
curious to see the outcome of the meeting between the Sun and the Ice
Witch that he tarried.</p>

<p id="id02556">The Ice Witch did not move—only turned her hideous face toward the Sun.
This continued for a short time. It appeared to the boy that the witch
was beginning to sigh and tremble. Her snow mantle fell, and the three
ferocious wolves howled less savagely.</p>

<p id="id02557">Suddenly the Sun cried:</p>

<p id="id02558">"Now my time is up!" and rolled out of the cave.</p>

<p id="id02559">Then the Ice Witch let loose her three wolves. Instantly the North Wind,<br>

Cold, and Darkness rushed from the cave and began to chase the Sun.<br>
</p>

<p id="id02560">"Drive him out! Drive him back!" shrieked the Ice Witch. "Chase him so
far that he can never come back! Teach him that Lapland is MINE!"</p>

<p id="id02561">But Nils Holgersson felt so unhappy when he saw that the Sun was to be
driven from Lapland that he awakened with a cry. When he recovered his
senses, he found himself at the bottom of a ravine.</p>

<p id="id02562">But where was Gorgo? How was he to find out where he himself was?</p>

<p id="id02563">He arose and looked all around him. Then he happened to glance upward
and saw a peculiar structure of pine twigs and branches that stood on a
cliff-ledge.</p>

<p id="id02564">"That must be one of those eagle nests that Gorgo—" But this was as far
as he got. He tore off his cap, waved it in the air, and cheered.</p>

<p id="id02565">Now he understood where Gorgo had brought him. This was the very glen
where the wild geese lived in summer, and just above it was the eagles'
cliff.</p>

<h5 id="id02566">HE HAD ARRIVED!</h5>

<p id="id02567">He would meet Morten Goosey-Gander and Akka and all the other comrades
in a few moments. Hurrah!</p>

<h5 id="id02568">THE MEETING</h5>

<p id="id02569">All was still in the glen. The sun had not yet stepped above the cliffs,
and Nils Holgersson knew that it was too early in the morning for the
geese to be awake.</p>

<p id="id02570">The boy walked along leisurely and searched for his friends. Before he
had gone very far, he paused with a smile, for he saw such a pretty
sight. A wild goose was sleeping in a neat little nest, and beside her
stood her goosey-gander. He too, slept, but it was obvious that he had
stationed himself thus near her that he might be on hand in the possible
event of danger.</p>

<p id="id02571">The boy went on without disturbing them and peeped into the willow brush
that covered the ground. It was not long before he spied another goose
couple. These were strangers, not of his flock, but he was so happy that
he began to hum—just because he had come across wild geese.</p>

<p id="id02572">He peeped into another bit of brushwood. There at last he saw two that
were familiar.</p>

<p id="id02573">It was certainly Neljä that was nesting there, and the goosey-gander
who stood beside her was surely Kolme. Why, of course! The boy had a
good mind to awaken them, but he let them sleep on, and walked away.</p>

<p id="id02574">In the next brush he saw Viisi and Kuusi, and not far from them he found
Yksi and Kaksi. All four were asleep, and the boy passed by without
disturbing them. As he approached the next brush, he thought he saw
something white shimmering among the bushes, and the heart of him
thumped with joy. Yes, it was as he expected. In there sat the dainty
Dunfin on an egg-filled nest. Beside her stood her white goosey-gander.
Although he slept, it was easy to see how proud he was to watch over his
wife up here among the Lapland mountains. The boy did not care to waken
the goosey-gander, so he walked on.</p>

<p id="id02575">He had to seek a long time before he came across any more wild geese.
Finally, he saw on a little hillock something that resembled a small,
gray moss tuft, and he knew that there was Akka from Kebnekaise. She
stood, wide awake, looking about as if she were keeping watch over the
whole glen.</p>

<p id="id02576">"Good morning, Mother Akka!" said the boy. "Please don't waken the other
geese yet awhile, for I wish to speak with you in private."</p>

<p id="id02577">The old leader-goose came rushing down the hill and up to the boy.</p>

<p id="id02578">First she seized hold of him and shook him, then she stroked him with
her bill before she shook him again. But she did not say a word, since
he asked her not to waken the others.</p>

<p id="id02579">Thumbietot kissed old Mother Akka on both cheeks, then he told her how
he had been carried off to Skansen and held captive there.</p>

<p id="id02580">"Now I must tell you that Smirre Fox, short of an ear, sat imprisoned in
the foxes' cage at Skansen," said the boy. "Although he was very mean to
us, I couldn't help feeling sorry for him. There were many other foxes
in the cage; and they seemed quite contented there, but Smirre sat all
the while looking dejected, longing for liberty.</p>

<p id="id02581">"I made many good friends at Skansen, and I learned one day from the
Lapp dog that a man had come to Skansen to buy foxes. He was from some
island far out in the ocean. All the foxes had been exterminated there,
and the rats were about to get the better of the inhabitants, so they
wished the foxes back again.</p>

<p id="id02582">"As soon as I learned of this, I went to Smirre's cage and said to him:</p>

<p id="id02583">"'To-morrow some men are coming here to get a pair of foxes. Don't hide,
Smirre, but keep well in the foreground and see to it that you are
chosen. Then you'll be free again.'</p>

<p id="id02584">"He followed my suggestion, and now he is running at large on the
island. What say you to this, Mother Akka? If you had been in my place,
would you not have done likewise?"</p>

<p id="id02585">"You have acted in a way that makes me wish I had done that myself,"
said the leader-goose proudly.</p>

<p id="id02586">"It's a relief to know that you approve," said the boy. "Now there is
one thing more I wish to ask you about:</p>

<p id="id02587">"One day I happened to see Gorgo, the eagle—the one that fought with
Morten Goosey-Gander—a prisoner at Skansen. He was in the eagles' cage
and looked pitifully forlorn. I was thinking of filing down the wire
roof over him and letting him out, but I also thought of his being a
dangerous robber and bird-eater, and wondered if I should be doing right
in letting loose such a plunderer, and if it were not better, perhaps,
to let him stay where he was. What say you, Mother Akka? Was it right
to think thus?"</p>

<p id="id02588">"No, it was not right!" retorted Akka. "Say what you will about the
eagles, they are proud birds and greater lovers of freedom than all
others. It is not right to keep them in captivity. Do you know what I
would suggest? This: that, as soon as you are well rested, we two make
the trip together to the big bird prison, and liberate Gorgo."</p>

<p id="id02589">"That is just the word I was expecting from you, Mother Akka," returned
the boy eagerly.</p>

<p id="id02590">"There are those who say that you no longer have any love in your heart
for the one you reared so tenderly, because he lives as eagles must
live. But I know now that it isn't true. And now I want to see if
Morten Goosey-Gander is awake.</p>

<p id="id02591">"Meanwhile, if you wish to say a 'thank you' to the one who brought me
here to you, I think you'll find him up there on the cliff ledge, where
once you found a helpless eaglet."</p>

</section></body></html>
