<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 24</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
<h2>THE STORY OF KARR AND GRAYSKIN</h2>

<h4 id="id01237" style="margin-top: 2em">KARR</h4>

<p id="id01238">About twelve years before Nils Holgersson started on his travels with
the wild geese there was a manufacturer at Kolmården who wanted to be
rid of one of his dogs. He sent for his game-keeper and said to him that
it was impossible to keep the dog because he could not be broken of the
habit of chasing all the sheep and fowl he set eyes on, and he asked the
man to take the dog into the forest and shoot him.</p>

<p id="id01239">The game-keeper slipped the leash on the dog to lead him to a spot in
the forest where all the superannuated dogs from the manor were shot and
buried. He was not a cruel man, but he was very glad to shoot that dog,
for he knew that sheep and chickens were not the only creatures he
hunted. Times without number he had gone into the forest and helped
himself to a hare or a grouse-chick.</p>

<p id="id01240">The dog was a little black-and-tan setter. His name was Karr, and he was
so wise he understood all that was said.</p>

<p id="id01241">As the game-keeper was leading him through the thickets, Karr knew only
too well what was in store for him. But this no one could have guessed
by his behaviour, for he neither hung his head nor dragged his tail, but
seemed as unconcerned as ever.</p>

<p id="id01242">It was because they were in the forest that the dog was so careful not
to appear the least bit anxious.</p>

<p id="id01243">There were great stretches of woodland on every side of the factory, and
this forest was famed both among animals and human beings because for
many, many years the owners had been so careful of it that they had
begrudged themselves even the trees needed for firewood. Nor had they
had the heart to thin or train them. The trees had been allowed to grow
as they pleased. Naturally a forest thus protected was a beloved refuge
for wild animals, which were to be found there in great numbers. Among
themselves they called it Liberty Forest, and regarded it as the best
retreat in the whole country.</p>

<p id="id01244">As the dog was being led through the woods he thought of what a bugaboo
he had been to all the small animals and birds that lived there.</p>

<p id="id01245">"Now, Karr, wouldn't they be happy in their lairs if they only knew what
was awaiting you?" he thought, but at the same time he wagged his tail
and barked cheerfully, so that no one should think that he was worried
or depressed.</p>

<p id="id01246">"What fun would there have been in living had I not hunted
occasionally?" he reasoned. "Let him who will, regret; it's not going to
be Karr!"</p>

<p id="id01247">But the instant the dog said this, a singular change came over him. He
stretched his neck as though he had a mind to howl. He no longer trotted
alongside the game-keeper, but walked behind him. It was plain that he
had begun to think of something unpleasant.</p>

<p id="id01248">It was early summer; the elk cows had just given birth to their young,
and, the night before, the dog had succeeded in parting from its mother
an elk calf not more than five days old, and had driven it down into the
marsh. There he had chased it back and forth over the knolls—not with
the idea of capturing it, but merely for the sport of seeing how he
could scare it. The elk cow knew that the marsh was bottomless so soon
after the thaw, and that it could not as yet hold up so large an animal
as herself, so she stood on the solid earth for the longest time,
watching! But when Karr kept chasing the calf farther and farther away,
she rushed out on the marsh, drove the dog off, took the calf with her,
and turned back toward firm land. Elk are more skilled than other
animals in traversing dangerous, marshy ground, and it seemed as if she
would reach solid land in safety; but when she was almost there a knoll
which she had stepped upon sank into the mire, and she went down with
it. She tried to rise, but could get no secure foothold, so she sank and
sank. Karr stood and looked on, not daring to move. When he saw that the
elk could not save herself, he ran away as fast as he could, for he had
begun to think of the beating he would get if it were discovered that he
had brought a mother elk to grief. He was so terrified that he dared not
pause for breath until he reached home.</p>

<p id="id01249">It was this that the dog recalled; and it troubled him in a way very
different from the recollection of all his other misdeeds. This was
doubtless because he had not really meant to kill either the elk cow or
her calf, but had deprived them of life without wishing to do so.</p>

<p id="id01250">"But maybe they are alive yet!" thought the dog. "They were not dead
when I ran away; perhaps they saved themselves."</p>

<p id="id01251">He was seized with an irresistible longing to know for a certainty while
yet there was time for him to find out. He noticed that the game-keeper
did not have a firm hold on the leash; so he made a sudden spring, broke
loose, and dashed through the woods down to the marsh with such speed
that he was out of sight before the game-keeper had time to level his
gun.</p>

<p id="id01252">There was nothing for the game-keeper to do but to rush after him. When
he got to the marsh he found the dog standing upon a knoll, howling with
all his might.</p>

<p id="id01253">The man thought he had better find out the meaning of this, so he
dropped his gun and crawled out over the marsh on hands and knees. He
had not gone far when he saw an elk cow lying dead in the quagmire.
Close beside her lay a little calf. It was still alive, but so much
exhausted that it could not move. Karr was standing beside the calf, now
bending down and licking it, now howling shrilly for help.</p>

<p id="id01254">The game-keeper raised the calf and began to drag it toward land. When
the dog understood that the calf would be saved he was wild with joy. He
jumped round and round the game-keeper, licking his hands and barking
with delight.</p>

<p id="id01255">The man carried the baby elk home and shut it up in a calf stall in the
cow shed. Then he got help to drag the mother elk from the marsh. Only
after this had been done did he remember that he was to shoot Karr. He
called the dog to him, and again took him into the forest.</p>

<p id="id01256">The game-keeper walked straight on toward the dog's grave; but all the
while he seemed to be thinking deeply. Suddenly he turned and walked
toward the manor.</p>

<p id="id01257">Karr had been trotting along quietly; but when the game-keeper turned
and started for home, he became anxious. The man must have discovered
that it was he that had caused the death of the elk, and now he was
going back to the manor to be thrashed before he was shot!</p>

<p id="id01258">To be beaten was worse than all else! With that prospect Karr could no
longer keep up his spirits, but hung his head. When he came to the manor
he did not look up, but pretended that he knew no one there.</p>

<p id="id01259">The master was standing on the stairs leading to the hall when the
game-keeper came forward.</p>

<p id="id01260">"Where on earth did that dog come from?" he exclaimed. "Surely it can't
be Karr? He must be dead this long time!"</p>

<p id="id01261">Then the man began to tell his master all about the mother elk, while
Karr made himself as little as he could, and crouched behind the
game-keeper's legs.</p>

<p id="id01262">Much to his surprise the man had only praise for him. He said it was
plain the dog knew that the elk were in distress, and wished to save
them.</p>

<p id="id01263">"You may do as you like, but I can't shoot that dog!" declared the
game-keeper.</p>

<p id="id01264">Karr raised himself and pricked up his ears. He could hardly believe
that he heard aright. Although he did not want to show how anxious he
had been, he couldn't help whining a little. Could it be possible that
his life was to be spared simply because he had felt uneasy about the
elk?</p>

<p id="id01265">The master thought that Karr had conducted himself well, but as he did
not want the dog, he could not decide at once what should be done with
him.</p>

<p id="id01266">"If you will take charge of him and answer for his good behaviour in the
future, he may as well live," he said, finally.</p>

<p id="id01267">This the game-keeper was only too glad to do, and that was how Karr came
to move to the game-keeper's lodge.</p>

<h5 id="id01268">GRAYSKIN'S FLIGHT</h5>

<p id="id01269">From the day that Karr went to live with the game-keeper he abandoned
entirely his forbidden chase in the forest. This was due not only to his
having been thoroughly frightened, but also to the fact that he did not
wish to make the game-keeper angry at him. Ever since his new master
saved his life the dog loved him above everything else. He thought only
of following him and watching over him. If he left the house, Karr would
run ahead to make sure that the way was clear, and if he sat at home,
Karr would lie before the door and keep a close watch on every one who
came and went.</p>

<p id="id01270">When all was quiet at the lodge, when no footsteps were heard on the
road, and the game-keeper was working in his garden, Karr would amuse
himself playing with the baby elk.</p>

<p id="id01271">At first the dog had no desire to leave his master even for a moment.
Since he accompanied him everywhere, he went with him to the cow shed.
When he gave the elk calf its milk, the dog would sit outside the stall
and gaze at it. The game-keeper called the calf Grayskin because he
thought it did not merit a prettier name, and Karr agreed with him on
that point.</p>

<p id="id01272">Every time the dog looked at it he thought that he had never seen
anything so ugly and misshapen as the baby elk, with its long, shambly
legs, which hung down from the body like loose stilts. The head was
large, old, and wrinkled, and it always drooped to one side. The skin
lay in tucks and folds, as if the animal had put on a coat that had not
been made for him. Always doleful and discontented, curiously enough he
jumped up every time Karr appeared as if glad to see him.</p>

<p id="id01273">The elk calf became less hopeful from day to day, did not grow any, and
at last he could not even rise when he saw Karr. Then the dog jumped up
into the crib to greet him, and thereupon a light kindled in the eyes of
the poor creature—as if a cherished longing were fulfilled.</p>

<p id="id01274">After that Karr visited the elk calf every day, and spent many hours
with him, licking his coat, playing and racing with him, till he taught
him a little of everything a forest animal should know.</p>

<p id="id01275">It was remarkable that, from the time Karr began to visit the elk calf
in his stall, the latter seemed more contented, and began to grow. After
he was fairly started, he grew so rapidly that in a couple of weeks the
stall could no longer hold him, and he had to be moved into a grove.</p>

<p id="id01276">When he had been in the grove two months his legs were so long that he
could step over the fence whenever he wished. Then the lord of the manor
gave the game-keeper permission to put up a higher fence and to allow
him more space. Here the elk lived for several years, and grew up into a
strong and handsome animal. Karr kept him company as often as he could;
but now it was no longer through pity, for a great friendship had sprung
up between the two. The elk was always inclined to be melancholy,
listless, and, indifferent, but Karr knew how to make him playful and
happy.</p>

<p id="id01277">Grayskin had lived for five summers on the game-keeper's place, when his
owner received a letter from a zoölogical garden abroad asking if the
elk might be purchased.</p>

<p id="id01278">The master was pleased with the proposal, the game-keeper was
distressed, but had not the power to say no; so it was decided that the
elk should be sold. Karr soon discovered what was in the air and ran
over to the elk to have a chat with him. The dog was very much
distressed at the thought of losing his friend, but the elk took the
matter calmly, and seemed neither glad nor sorry.</p>

<p id="id01279">"Do you think of letting them send you away without offering
resistance?" asked Karr.</p>

<p id="id01280">"What good would it do to resist?" asked Grayskin. "I should prefer to
remain where I am, naturally, but if I've been sold, I shall have to go,
of course."</p>

<p id="id01281">Karr looked at Grayskin and measured him with his eyes. It was apparent
that the elk was not yet full grown. He did not have the broad antlers,
high hump, and long mane of the mature elk; but he certainly had
strength enough to fight for his freedom.</p>

<p id="id01282">"One can see that he has been in captivity all his life," thought Karr,
but said nothing.</p>

<p id="id01283">Karr left and did not return to the grove till long past midnight. By
that time he knew Grayskin would be awake and eating his breakfast.</p>

<p id="id01284">"Of course you are doing right, Grayskin, in letting them take you
away," remarked Karr, who appeared now to be calm and satisfied. "You
will be a prisoner in a large park and will have no responsibilities. It
seems a pity that you must leave here without having seen the forest.
You know your ancestors have a saying that 'the elk are one with the
forest.' But you haven't even been in a forest!"</p>

<p id="id01285">Grayskin glanced up from the clover which he stood munching.</p>

<p id="id01286">"Indeed, I should love to see the forest, but how am I to get over the
fence?" he said with his usual apathy.</p>

<p id="id01287">"Oh, that is difficult for one who has such short legs!" said Karr.</p>

<p id="id01288">The elk glanced slyly at the dog, who jumped the fence many times a
day—little as he was.</p>

<p id="id01289">He walked over to the fence, and with one spring he was on the other
side, without knowing how it happened.</p>

<p id="id01290">Then Karr and Grayskin went into the forest. It was a beautiful
moonlight night in late summer; but in among the trees it was dark, and
the elk walked along slowly.</p>

<p id="id01291">"Perhaps we had better turn back," said Karr. "You, who have never
before tramped the wild forest, might easily break your legs." Grayskin
moved more rapidly and with more courage.</p>

<p id="id01292">Karr conducted the elk to a part of the forest where the pines grew so
thickly that no wind could penetrate them.</p>

<p id="id01293">"It is here that your kind are in the habit of seeking shelter from cold
and storm," said Karr. "Here they stand under the open skies all winter.
But you will fare much better where you are going, for you will stand in
a shed, with a roof over your head, like an ox."</p>

<p id="id01294">Grayskin made no comment, but stood quietly and drank in the strong,
piney air.</p>

<p id="id01295">"Have you anything more to show me, or have I now seen the whole
forest?" he asked.</p>

<p id="id01296">Then Karr went with him to a big marsh, and showed him clods and
quagmire.</p>

<p id="id01297">"Over this marsh the elk take flight when they are in peril," said Karr.
"I don't know how they manage it, but, large and heavy as they are, they
can walk here without sinking. Of course you couldn't hold yourself up
on such dangerous ground, but then there is no occasion for you to do
so, for you will never be hounded by hunters."</p>

<p id="id01298">Grayskin made no retort, but with a leap he was out on the marsh, and
happy when he felt how the clods rocked under him. He dashed across the
marsh, and came back again to Karr, without having stepped into a
mudhole.</p>

<p id="id01299">"Have we seen the whole forest now?" he asked.</p>

<p id="id01300">"No, not yet," said Karr.</p>

<p id="id01301">He next conducted the elk to the skirt of the forest, where fine oaks,
lindens, and aspens grew.</p>

<p id="id01302">"Here your kind eat leaves and bark, which they consider the choicest
of food; but you will probably get better fare abroad."</p>

<p id="id01303">Grayskin was astonished when he saw the enormous leaf-trees spreading
like a great canopy above him. He ate both oak leaves and aspen bark.</p>

<p id="id01304">"These taste deliciously bitter and good!" he remarked. "Better than
clover!"</p>

<p id="id01305">"Then wasn't it well that you should taste them once?" said the dog.</p>

<p id="id01306">Thereupon he took the elk down to a little forest lake. The water was as
smooth as a mirror, and reflected the shores, which were veiled in thin,
light mists. When Grayskin saw the lake he stood entranced.</p>

<p id="id01307">"What is this, Karr?" he asked.</p>

<p id="id01308">It was the first time that he had seen a lake.</p>

<p id="id01309">"It's a large body of water—a lake," said Karr. "Your people swim
across it from shore to shore. One could hardly expect you to be
familiar with this; but at least you should go in and take a swim!"</p>

<p id="id01310">Karr, himself, plunged into the water for a swim. Grayskin stayed back
on the shore for some little time, but finally followed. He grew
breathless with delight as the cool water stole soothingly around his
body. He wanted it over his back, too, so went farther out. Then he felt
that the water could hold him up, and began to swim. He swam all around
Karr, ducking and snorting, perfectly at home in the water.</p>

<p id="id01311">When they were on shore again, the dog asked if they had not better go
home now.</p>

<p id="id01312">"It's a long time until morning," observed Grayskin, "so we can tramp
around in the forest a little longer."</p>

<p id="id01313">They went again into the pine wood. Presently they came to an open glade
illuminated by the moonlight, where grass and flowers shimmered beneath
the dew. Some large animals were grazing on this forest meadow—an elk
bull, several elk cows and a number of elk calves. When Grayskin caught
sight of them he stopped short. He hardly glanced at the cows or the
young ones, but stared at the old bull, which had broad antlers with
many taglets, a high hump, and a long-haired fur piece hanging down from
his throat.</p>

<p id="id01314">"What kind of an animal is that?" asked Grayskin in wonderment.</p>

<p id="id01315">"He is called Antler-Crown," said Karr, "and he is your kinsman. One of
these days you, too, will have broad antlers, like those, and just such
a mane; and if you were to remain in the forest, very likely you, also,
would have a herd to lead."</p>

<p id="id01316">"If he is my kinsman, I must go closer and have a look at him," said<br>

Grayskin. "I never dreamed that an animal could be so stately!"<br>
</p>

<p id="id01317">Grayskin walked over to the elk, but almost immediately he came back to<br>

Karr, who had remained at the edge of the clearing.<br>
</p>

<p id="id01318">"You were not very well received, were you?" said Karr.</p>

<p id="id01319">"I told him that this was the first time I had run across any of my
kinsmen, and asked if I might walk with them on their meadow. But they
drove me back, threatening me with their antlers."</p>

<p id="id01320">"You did right to retreat," said Karr. "A young elk bull with only a
taglet crown must be careful about fighting with an old elk. Another
would have disgraced his name in the whole forest by retreating without
resistance, but such things needn't worry you who are going to move to a
foreign land."</p>

<p id="id01321">Karr had barely finished speaking when Grayskin turned and walked down
to the meadow. The old elk came toward him, and instantly they began to
fight. Their antlers met and clashed, and Grayskin was driven backward
over the whole meadow. Apparently he did not know how to make use of his
strength; but when he came to the edge of the forest, he planted his
feet on the ground, pushed hard with his antlers, and began to force
Antler-Crown back.</p>

<p id="id01322">Grayskin fought quietly, while Antler-Crown puffed and snorted. The old
elk, in his turn, was now being forced backward over the meadow.
Suddenly a loud crash was heard! A taglet in the old elk's antlers had
snapped. He tore himself loose, and dashed into the forest.</p>

<p id="id01323">Karr was still standing at the forest border when Grayskin came along.</p>

<p id="id01324">"Now that you have seen what there is in the forest," said Karr, "will
you come home with me?"</p>

<p id="id01325">"Yes, it's about time," observed the elk.</p>

<p id="id01326">Both were silent on the way home. Karr sighed several times, as if he
was disappointed about something; but Grayskin stepped along—his head
in the air—and seemed delighted over the adventure. He walked ahead
unhesitatingly until they came to the enclosure. There he paused. He
looked in at the narrow pen where he had lived up till now; saw the
beaten ground, the stale fodder, the little trough where he had drunk
water, and the dark shed in which he had slept.</p>

<p id="id01327">"The elk are one with the forest!" he cried. Then he threw back his
head, so that his neck rested against his back, and rushed wildly into
the woods.</p>

<h5 id="id01328">HELPLESS, THE WATER-SNAKE</h5>

<p id="id01329">In a pine thicket in the heart of Liberty Forest, every year, in the
month of August, there appeared a few grayish-white moths of the kind
which are called nun moths. They were small and few in number, and
scarcely any one noticed them. When they had fluttered about in the
depth of the forest a couple of nights, they laid a few thousand eggs on
the branches of trees; and shortly afterward dropped lifeless to the
ground.</p>

<p id="id01330">When spring came, little prickly caterpillars crawled out from the eggs
and began to eat the pine needles. They had good appetites, but they
never seemed to do the trees any serious harm, because they were hotly
pursued by birds. It was seldom that more than a few hundred
caterpillars escaped the pursuers.</p>

<p id="id01331">The poor things that lived to be full grown crawled up on the branches,
spun white webs around themselves, and sat for a couple of weeks as
motionless pupae. During this period, as a rule, more than half of them
were abducted. If a hundred nun moths came forth in August, winged and
perfect, it was reckoned a good year for them.</p>

<p id="id01332">This sort of uncertain and obscure existence did the moths lead for many
years in Liberty Forest. There were no insect folk in the whole country
that were so scarce, and they would have remained quite harmless and
powerless had they not, most unexpectedly, received a helper.</p>

<p id="id01333">This fact has some connection with Grayskin's flight from the
game-keeper's paddock. Grayskin roamed the forest that he might become
more familiar with the place. Late in the afternoon he happened to
squeeze through some thickets behind a clearing where the soil was muddy
and slimy, and in the centre of it was a murky pool. This open space was
encircled by tall pines almost bare from age and miasmic air. Grayskin
was displeased with the place and would have left it at once had he not
caught sight of some bright green calla leaves which grew near the pool.</p>

<p id="id01334">As he bent his head toward the calla stalks, he happened to disturb a
big black snake, which lay sleeping under them. Grayskin had heard Karr
speak of the poisonous adders that were to be found in the forest. So,
when the snake raised its head, shot out its tongue and hissed at him,
he thought he had encountered an awfully dangerous reptile. He was
terrified and, raising his foot, he struck so hard with his hoof that he
crushed the snake's head. Then, away he ran in hot haste!</p>

<p id="id01335">As soon as Grayskin had gone, another snake, just as long and as black
as the first, came up from the pool. It crawled over to the dead one,
and licked the poor, crushed-in head.</p>

<p id="id01336">"Can it be true that you are dead, old Harmless?" hissed the snake. "We
two have lived together so many years; we two have been so happy with
each other, and have fared so well here in the swamp, that we have lived
to be older than all the other water-snakes in the forest! This is the
worst sorrow that could have befallen me!"</p>

<p id="id01337">The snake was so broken-hearted that his long body writhed as if it had
been wounded. Even the frogs, who lived in constant fear of him, were
sorry for him.</p>

<p id="id01338">"What a wicked creature he must be to murder a poor water-snake that
cannot defend itself!" hissed the snake. "He certainly deserves a severe
punishment. As sure as my name is Helpless and I'm the oldest
water-snake in the whole forest, I'll be avenged! I shall not rest until
that elk lies as dead on the ground as my poor old snake-wife."</p>

<p id="id01339">When the snake had made this vow he curled up into a hoop and began to
ponder. One can hardly imagine anything that would be more difficult for
a poor water-snake than to wreak vengeance upon a big, strong elk; and
old Helpless pondered day and night without finding any solution.</p>

<p id="id01340">One night, as he lay there with his vengeance-thoughts, he heard a
slight rustle over his head. He glanced up and saw a few light nun moths
playing in among the trees.</p>

<p id="id01341">He followed them with his eyes a long while; then began to hiss loudly
to himself, apparently pleased with the thought that had occurred to
him—then he fell asleep.</p>

<p id="id01342">The next morning the water-snake went over to see Crawlie, the adder,
who lived in a stony and hilly part of Liberty Forest. He told him all
about the death of the old water-snake, and begged that he who could
deal such deadly thrusts would undertake the work of vengeance. But
Crawlie was not exactly disposed to go to war with an elk.</p>

<p id="id01343">"If I were to attack an elk," said the adder, "he would instantly kill
me. Old Harmless is dead and gone, and we can't bring her back to life,
so why should I rush into danger on her account?"</p>

<p id="id01344">When the water-snake got this reply he raised his head a whole foot from
the ground, and hissed furiously:</p>

<p id="id01345">"Vish vash! Vish vash!" he said. "It's a pity that you, who have been
blessed with such weapons of defence, should be so cowardly that you
don't dare use them!"</p>

<p id="id01346">When the adder heard this, he, too, got angry.</p>

<p id="id01347">"Crawl away, old Helpless!" he hissed. "The poison is in my fangs, but I
would rather spare one who is said to be my kinsman."</p>

<p id="id01348">But the water-snake did not move from the spot, and for a long time the
snakes lay there hissing abusive epithets at each other.</p>

<p id="id01349">When Crawlie was so angry that he couldn't hiss, but could only dart his
tongue out, the water-snake changed the subject, and began to talk in a
very different tone.</p>

<p id="id01350">"I had still another errand, Crawlie," he said, lowering his voice to a
mild whisper. "But now I suppose you are so angry that you wouldn't care
to help me?"</p>

<p id="id01351">"If you don't ask anything foolish of me, I shall certainly be at your
service."</p>

<p id="id01352">"In the pine trees down by the swamp live a moth folk that fly around
all night."</p>

<p id="id01353">"I know all about them," remarked Crawlie. "What's up with them now?"</p>

<p id="id01354">"They are the smallest insect family in the forest," said Helpless, "and
the most harmless, since the caterpillars content themselves with
gnawing only pine needles."</p>

<p id="id01355">"Yes, I know," said Crawlie.</p>

<p id="id01356">"I'm afraid those moths, will soon be exterminated," sighed the
water-snake. "There are so many who pick off the caterpillars in the
spring."</p>

<p id="id01357">Now Crawlie began to understand that the water-snake wanted the
caterpillars for his own purpose, and he answered pleasantly:</p>

<p id="id01358">"Do you wish me to say to the owls that they are to leave those pine
tree worms in peace?"</p>

<p id="id01359">"Yes, it would be well if you who have some authority in the forest
should do this," said Helpless.</p>

<p id="id01360">"I might also drop a good word for the pine needle pickers among the
thrushes?" volunteered the adder. "I will gladly serve you when you do
not demand anything unreasonable."</p>

<p id="id01361">"Now you have given me a good promise, Crawlie," said Helpless, "and I'm
glad that I came to you."</p>

<h5 id="id01362">THE NUN MOTHS</h5>

<p id="id01363">One morning—several years later—Karr lay asleep on the porch. It was
in the early summer, the season of light nights, and it was as bright as
day, although the sun was not yet up. Karr was awakened by some one
calling his name.</p>

<p id="id01364">"Is it you, Grayskin?" he asked, for he was accustomed to the elk's
nightly visits. Again he heard the call; then he recognized Grayskin's
voice, and hastened in the direction of the sound.</p>

<p id="id01365">Karr heard the elk's footfalls in the distance, as he dashed into the
thickest pine wood, and straight through the brush, following no trodden
path. Karr could not catch up with him, and he had great difficulty in
even following the trail. "Karr, Karri" came the cry, and the voice was
certainly Grayskin's, although it had a ring now which the dog had never
heard before.</p>

<p id="id01366">"I'm coming, I'm coming!" the dog responded. "Where are you?"</p>

<p id="id01367">"Karr, Karr! Don't you see how it falls and falls?" said Grayskin.</p>

<p id="id01368">Then Karr noticed that the pine needles kept dropping and dropping from
the trees, like a steady fall of rain.</p>

<p id="id01369">"Yes, I see how it falls," he cried, and ran far into the forest in
search of the elk.</p>

<p id="id01370">Grayskin kept running through the thickets, while Karr was about to lose
the trail again.</p>

<p id="id01371">"Karr, Karr!" roared Grayskin; "can't you scent that peculiar odour in
the forest?"</p>

<p id="id01372">Karr stopped and sniffed.</p>

<p id="id01373">He had not thought of it before, but now he remarked that the pines sent
forth a much stronger odour than usual.</p>

<p id="id01374">"Yes, I catch the scent," he said. He did not stop long enough to find
out the cause of it, but hurried on after Grayskin.</p>

<p id="id01375">The elk ran ahead with such speed that the dog could not catch up with
him.</p>

<p id="id01376">"Karr, Karr!" he called; "can't you hear the crunching on the pines?"<br>

Now his tone was so plaintive it would have melted a stone.<br>
</p>

<p id="id01377">Karr paused to listen. He heard a faint but distinct "tap, tap," on the
trees. It sounded like the ticking of a watch.</p>

<p id="id01378">"Yes, I hear how it ticks," cried Karr, and ran no farther. He
understood that the elk did not want him to follow, but to take notice
of something that was happening in the forest.</p>

<p id="id01379">Karr was standing beneath the drooping branches of a great pine. He
looked carefully at it; the needles moved. He went closer and saw a mass
of grayish-white caterpillars creeping along the branches, gnawing off
the needles. Every branch was covered with them. The crunch, crunch in
the trees came from the working of their busy little jaws. Gnawed-off
needles fell to the ground in a continuous shower, and from the poor
pines there came such a strong odour that the dog suffered from it.</p>

<p id="id01380">"What can be the meaning of this?" wondered Karr. "It's too bad about
the pretty trees! Soon they'll have no beauty left."</p>

<p id="id01381">He walked from tree to tree, trying with his poor eyesight to see if all
was well with them.</p>

<p id="id01382">"There's a pine they haven't touched," he thought. But they had taken
possession of it, too. "And here's a birch—no, this also! The
game-keeper will not be pleased with this," observed Karr.</p>

<p id="id01383">He ran deeper into the thickets, to learn how far the destruction had
spread. Wherever he went, he heard the same ticking; scented the same
odour; saw the same needle rain. There was no need of his pausing to
investigate. He understood it all by these signs. The little
caterpillars were everywhere. The whole forest was being ravaged by
them!</p>

<p id="id01384">All of a sudden he came to a tract where there was no odour, and where
all was still.</p>

<p id="id01385">"Here's the end of their domain," thought the dog, as he paused and
glanced about.</p>

<p id="id01386">But here it was even worse; for the caterpillars had already done their
work, and the trees were needleless. They were like the dead. The only
thing that covered them was a network of ragged threads, which the
caterpillars had spun to use as roads and bridges.</p>

<p id="id01387">In there, among the dying trees, Grayskin stood waiting for Karr.</p>

<p id="id01388">He was not alone. With him were four old elk—the most respected in the
forest. Karr knew them: They were Crooked-Back, who was a small elk, but
had a larger hump than the others; Antler-Crown, who was the most
dignified of the elk; Rough-Mane, with the thick coat; and an old
long-legged one, who, up till the autumn before, when he got a bullet in
his thigh, had been terribly hot-tempered and quarrelsome.</p>

<p id="id01389">"What in the world is happening to the forest?" Karr asked when he came
up to the elk. They stood with lowered heads, far protruding upper lips,
and looked puzzled.</p>

<p id="id01390">"No one can tell," answered Grayskin. "This insect family used to be the
least hurtful of any in the forest, and never before have they done any
damage. But these last few years they have been multiplying so fast that
now it appears as if the entire forest would be destroyed."</p>

<p id="id01391">"Yes, it looks bad," Karr agreed, "but I see that the wisest animals in
the forest have come together to hold a consultation. Perhaps you have
already found some remedy?"</p>

<p id="id01392">When the dog said this, Crooked-Back solemnly raised his heavy head,
pricked up his long ears, and spoke:</p>

<p id="id01393">"We have summoned you hither, Karr, that we may learn if the humans know
of this desolation."</p>

<p id="id01394">"No," said Karr, "no human being ever comes thus far into the forest
when it's not hunting time. They know nothing of this misfortune."</p>

<p id="id01395">Then Antler-Crown said:</p>

<p id="id01396">"We who have lived long in the forest do not think that we can fight
this insect pest all by ourselves."</p>

<p id="id01397">"After this there will be no peace in the forest!" put in Rough-Mane.</p>

<p id="id01398">"But we can't let the whole Liberty Forest go to rack and ruin!"
protested Big-and-Strong. "We'll have to consult the humans; there is no
alternative."</p>

<p id="id01399">Karr understood that the elk had difficulty in expressing what they
wished to say, and he tried to help them.</p>

<p id="id01400">"Perhaps you want me to let the people know the conditions here?" he
suggested.</p>

<p id="id01401">All the old elk nodded their heads.</p>

<p id="id01402">"It's most unfortunate that we are obliged to ask help of human beings,
but we have no choice."</p>

<p id="id01403">A moment later Karr was on his way home. As he ran ahead, deeply
distressed over all that he had heard and seen, a big black water-snake
approached them.</p>

<p id="id01404">"Well met in the forest!" hissed the water-snake.</p>

<p id="id01405">"Well met again!" snarled Karr, and rushed by without stopping.</p>

<p id="id01406">The snake turned and tried to catch up to him.</p>

<p id="id01407">"Perhaps that creature also, is worried about the forest," thought Karr,
and waited.</p>

<p id="id01408">Immediately the snake began to talk about the great disaster.</p>

<p id="id01409">"There will be an end of peace and quiet in the forest when human beings
are called hither," said the snake.</p>

<p id="id01410">"I'm afraid there will," the dog agreed; "but the oldest forest dwellers
know what they're about!" he added.</p>

<p id="id01411">"I think I know a better plan," said the snake, "if I can get the reward<br>

I wish."<br>
</p>

<p id="id01412">"Are you not the one whom every one around here calls old Helpless?"
said the dog, sneeringly.</p>

<p id="id01413">"I'm an old inhabitant of the forest," said the snake, "and I know how
to get rid of such plagues."</p>

<p id="id01414">"If you clear the forest of that pest, I feel sure you can have anything
you ask for," said Karr.</p>

<p id="id01415">The snake did not respond to this until he had crawled under a tree
stump, where he was well protected. Then he said:</p>

<p id="id01416">"Tell Grayskin that if he will leave Liberty Forest forever, and go far
north, where no oak tree grows, I will send sickness and death to all
the creeping things that gnaw the pines and spruces!"</p>

<p id="id01417">"What's that you say?" asked Karr, bristling up. "What harm has Grayskin
ever done you?"</p>

<p id="id01418">"He has slain the one whom I loved best," the snake declared, "and I
want to be avenged."</p>

<p id="id01419">Before the snake had finished speaking, Karr made a dash for him; but
the reptile lay safely hidden under the tree stump.</p>

<p id="id01420">"Stay where you are!" Karr concluded. "We'll manage to drive out the
caterpillars without your help."</p>

<h5 id="id01421">THE BIG WAR OF THE MOTHS</h5>

<p id="id01422">The following spring, as Karr was dashing through the forest one
morning, he heard some one behind him calling: "Karr! Karr!"</p>

<p id="id01423">He turned and saw an old fox standing outside his lair.</p>

<p id="id01424">"You must tell me if the humans are doing anything for the forest," said
the fox.</p>

<p id="id01425">"Yes, you may be sure they are!" said Karr. "They are working as hard as
they can."</p>

<p id="id01426">"They have killed off all my kinsfolk, and they'll be killing me next,"
protested the fox. "But they shall be pardoned for that if only they
save the forest."</p>

<p id="id01427">That year Karr never ran into the woods without some animal's asking if
the humans could save the forest. It was not easy for the dog to answer;
the people themselves were not certain that they could conquer the
moths. But considering how feared and hated old Kolmården had always
been, it was remarkable that every day more than a hundred men went
there, to work. They cleared away the underbrush. They felled dead
trees, lopped off branches from the live ones so that the caterpillars
could not easily crawl from tree to tree; they also dug wide trenches
around the ravaged parts and put up lime-washed fences to keep them out
of new territory. Then they painted rings of lime around the trunks of
trees to prevent the caterpillars leaving those they had already
stripped. The idea was to force them to remain where they were until
they starved to death.</p>

<p id="id01428">The people worked with the forest until far into the spring. They were
hopeful, and could hardly wait for the caterpillars to come out from
their eggs, feeling certain that they had shut them in so effectually
that most of them would die of starvation.</p>

<p id="id01429">But in the early summer the caterpillars came out, more numerous than
ever.</p>

<p id="id01430">They were everywhere! They crawled on the country roads, on fences, on
the walls of the cabins. They wandered outside the confines of Liberty
Forest to other parts of Kolmården.</p>

<p id="id01431">"They won't stop till all our forests are destroyed!" sighed the people,
who were in great despair, and could not enter the forest without
weeping.</p>

<p id="id01432">Karr was so sick of the sight of all these creeping, gnawing things that
he could hardly bear to step outside the door. But one day he felt that
he must go and find out how Grayskin was getting on. He took the
shortest cut to the elk's haunts, and hurried along—his nose close to
the earth. When he came to the tree stump where he had met Helpless the
year before, the snake was still there, and called to him:</p>

<p id="id01433">"Have you told Grayskin what I said to you when last we met?" asked the
water-snake.</p>

<p id="id01434">Karr only growled and tried to get at him.</p>

<p id="id01435">"If you haven't told him, by all means do so!" insisted the snake. "You
must see that the humans know of no cure for this plague."</p>

<p id="id01436">"Neither do you!" retorted the dog, and ran on.</p>

<p id="id01437">Karr found Grayskin, but the elk was so low-spirited that he scarcely
greeted the dog. He began at once to talk of the forest.</p>

<p id="id01438">"I don't know what I wouldn't give if this misery were only at an end!"
he said.</p>

<p id="id01439">"Now I shall tell you that 'tis said you could save the forest." Then<br>

Karr delivered the water-snake's message.<br>
</p>

<p id="id01440">"If any one but Helpless had promised this, I should immediately go into
exile," declared the elk. "But how can a poor water-snake have the power
to work such a miracle?"</p>

<p id="id01441">"Of course it's only a bluff," said Karr. "Water-snakes always like to
pretend that they know more than other creatures."</p>

<p id="id01442">When Karr was ready to go home, Grayskin accompanied him part of the
way. Presently Karr heard a thrush, perched on a pine top, cry:</p>

<p id="id01443">"There goes Grayskin, who has destroyed the forest! There goes Grayskin,
who has destroyed the forest!"</p>

<p id="id01444">Karr thought that he had not heard correctly, but the next moment a hare
came darting across the path. When the hare saw them, he stopped,
flapped his ears, and screamed:</p>

<p id="id01445">"Here comes Grayskin, who has destroyed the forest!" Then he ran as fast
as he could.</p>

<p id="id01446">"What do they mean by that?" asked Karr.</p>

<p id="id01447">"I really don't know," said Grayskin. "I think that the small forest
animals are displeased with me because I was the one who proposed that
we should ask help of human beings. When the underbrush was cut down,
all their lairs and hiding places were destroyed."</p>

<p id="id01448">They walked on together a while longer, and Karr heard the same cry
coming from all directions:</p>

<p id="id01449">"There goes Grayskin, who has destroyed the forest!"</p>

<p id="id01450">Grayskin pretended not to hear it; but Karr understood why the elk was
so downhearted.</p>

<p id="id01451">"I say, Grayskin, what does the water-snake mean by saying you killed
the one he loved best?"</p>

<p id="id01452">"How can I tell?" said Grayskin. "You know very well that I never kill
anything."</p>

<p id="id01453">Shortly after that they met the four old elk—Crooked-Back,
Antler-Crown, Rough-Mane, and Big-and-Strong, who were coming along
slowly, one after the other.</p>

<p id="id01454">"Well met in the forest!" called Grayskin.</p>

<p id="id01455">"Well met in turn!" answered the elk.</p>

<p id="id01456">"We were just looking for you, Grayskin, to consult with you about the
forest."</p>

<p id="id01457">"The fact is," began Crooked-Back, "we have been informed that a crime
has been committed here, and that the whole forest is being destroyed
because the criminal has not been punished."</p>

<p id="id01458">"What kind of a crime was it?"</p>

<p id="id01459">"Some one killed a harmless creature that he couldn't eat. Such an act
is accounted a crime in Liberty Forest."</p>

<p id="id01460">"Who could have done such a cowardly thing?" wondered Grayskin.</p>

<p id="id01461">"They say that an elk did it, and we were just going to ask if you knew
who it was."</p>

<p id="id01462">"No," said Grayskin, "I have never heard of an elk killing a harmless
creature."</p>

<p id="id01463">Grayskin parted from the four old elk, and went on with Karr. He was
silent and walked with lowered head. They happened to pass Crawlie, the
adder, who lay on his shelf of rock.</p>

<p id="id01464">"There goes Grayskin, who has destroyed the whole forest!" hissed<br>

Crawlie, like all the rest.<br>
</p>

<p id="id01465">By that time Grayskin's patience was exhausted. He walked up to the
snake, and raised a forefoot.</p>

<p id="id01466">"Do you think of crushing me as you crushed the old water-snake?" hissed<br>

Crawlie.<br>
</p>

<p id="id01467">"Did I kill a water-snake?" asked Grayskin, astonished.</p>

<p id="id01468">"The first day you were in the forest you killed the wife of poor old<br>

Helpless," said Crawlie.<br>
</p>

<p id="id01469">Grayskin turned quickly from the adder, and continued his walk with<br>

Karr. Suddenly he stopped.<br>
</p>

<p id="id01470">"Karr, it was I who committed that crime! I killed a harmless creature;
therefore it is on my account that the forest is being destroyed."</p>

<p id="id01471">"What are you saying?" Karr interrupted.</p>

<p id="id01472">"You may tell the water-snake, Helpless, that Grayskin goes into exile
to-night!"</p>

<p id="id01473">"That I shall never tell him!" protested Karr. "The Far North is a
dangerous country for elk."</p>

<p id="id01474">"Do you think that I wish to remain here, when I have caused a disaster
like this?" protested Grayskin.</p>

<p id="id01475">"Don't be rash! Sleep over it before you do anything!"</p>

<p id="id01476">"It was you who taught me that the elk are one with the forest," said<br>

Grayskin, and so saying he parted from Karr.<br>
</p>

<p id="id01477">The dog went home alone; but this talk with Grayskin troubled him, and
the next morning he returned to the forest to seek him, but Grayskin was
not to be found, and the dog did not search long for him. He realized
that the elk had taken the snake at his word, and had gone into exile.</p>

<p id="id01478">On his walk home Karr was too unhappy for words! He could not understand
why Grayskin should allow that wretch of a water-snake to trick him
away. He had never heard of such folly! "What power can that old
Helpless have?"</p>

<p id="id01479">As Karr walked along, his mind full of these thoughts, he happened to
see the game-keeper, who stood pointing up at a tree.</p>

<p id="id01480">"What are you looking at?" asked a man who stood beside him.</p>

<p id="id01481">"Sickness has come among the caterpillars," observed the game-keeper.</p>

<p id="id01482">Karr was astonished, but he was even more angered at the snake's having
the power to keep his word. Grayskin would have to stay away a long long
time, for, of course, that water-snake would never die.</p>

<p id="id01483">At the very height of his grief a thought came to Karr which comforted
him a little.</p>

<p id="id01484">"Perhaps the water-snake won't live so long, after all!" he thought.
"Surely he cannot always lie protected under a tree root. As soon as he
has cleaned out the caterpillars, I know some one who is going to bite
his head off!"</p>

<p id="id01485">It was true that an illness had made its appearance among the
caterpillars. The first summer it did not spread much. It had only just
broken out when it was time for the larvae to turn into pupae. From the
latter came millions of moths. They flew around in the trees like a
blinding snowstorm, and laid countless numbers of eggs. An even greater
destruction was prophesied for the following year.</p>

<p id="id01486">The destruction came not only to the forest, but also to the
caterpillars. The sickness spread quickly from forest to forest. The
sick caterpillars stopped eating, crawled up to the branches of the
trees, and died there.</p>

<p id="id01487">There was great rejoicing among the people when they saw them die, but
there was even greater rejoicing among the forest animals.</p>

<p id="id01488">From day to day the dog Karr went about with savage glee, thinking of
the hour when he might venture to kill Helpless.</p>

<p id="id01489">But the caterpillars, meanwhile, had spread over miles of pine woods.
Not in one summer did the disease reach them all. Many lived to become
pupas and moths.</p>

<p id="id01490">Grayskin sent messages to his friend Karr by the birds of passage, to
say that he was alive and faring well. But the birds told Karr
confidentially that on several occasions Grayskin had been pursued by
poachers, and that only with the greatest difficulty had he escaped.</p>

<p id="id01491">Karr lived in a state of continual grief, yearning, and anxiety. Yet he
had to wait two whole summers more before there was an end of the
caterpillars!</p>

<p id="id01492">Karr no sooner heard the game-keeper say that the forest was out of
danger than he started on a hunt for Helpless. But when he was in the
thick of the forest he made a frightful discovery: He could not hunt any
more, he could not run, he could not track his enemy, and he could not
see at all!</p>

<p id="id01493">During the long years of waiting, old age had overtaken Karr. He had
grown old without having noticed it. He had not the strength even to
kill a water-snake. He was not able to save his friend Grayskin from his
enemy.</p>

<h5 id="id01494">RETRIBUTION</h5>

<p id="id01495">One afternoon Akka from Kebnekaise and her flock alighted on the shore
of a forest lake.</p>

<p id="id01496">Spring was backward—as it always is in the mountain districts. Ice
covered all the lake save a narrow strip next the land. The geese at
once plunged into the water to bathe and hunt for food. In the morning
Nils Holgersson had dropped one of his wooden shoes, so he went down by
the elms and birches that grew along the shore, to look for something to
bind around his foot.</p>

<p id="id01497">The boy walked quite a distance before he found anything that he could
use. He glanced about nervously, for he did not fancy being in the
forest.</p>

<p id="id01498">"Give me the plains and the lakes!" he thought. "There you can see what
you are likely to meet. Now, if this were a grove of little birches, it
would be well enough, for then the ground would be almost bare; but how
people can like these wild, pathless forests is incomprehensible to me.
If I owned this land I would chop down every tree."</p>

<p id="id01499">At last he caught sight of a piece of birch bark, and just as he was
fitting it to his foot he heard a rustle behind him. He turned quickly.
A snake darted from the brush straight toward him!</p>

<p id="id01500">The snake was uncommonly long and thick, but the boy soon saw that it
had a white spot on each cheek.</p>

<p id="id01501">"Why, it's only a water-snake," he laughed; "it can't harm me."</p>

<p id="id01502">But the next instant the snake gave him a powerful blow on the chest
that knocked him down. The boy was on his feet in a second and running
away, but the snake was after him! The ground was stony and scrubby; the
boy could not proceed very fast; and the snake was close at his heels.</p>

<p id="id01503">Then the boy saw a big rock in front of him, and began to scale it.</p>

<p id="id01504">"I do hope the snake can't follow me here!" he thought, but he had no
sooner reached the top of the rock than he saw that the snake was
following him.</p>

<p id="id01505">Quite close to the boy, on a narrow ledge at the top of the rock, lay a
round stone as large as a man's head. As the snake came closer, the boy
ran behind the stone, and gave it a push. It rolled right down on the
snake, drawing it along to the ground, where it landed on its head.</p>

<p id="id01506">"That stone did its work well!" thought the boy with a sigh of relief,
as he saw the snake squirm a little, and then lie perfectly still.</p>

<p id="id01507">"I don't think I've been in greater peril on the whole journey," he
said.</p>

<p id="id01508">He had hardly recovered from the shock when he heard a rustle above him,
and saw a bird circling through the air to light on the ground right
beside the snake. The bird was like a crow in size and form, but was
dressed in a pretty coat of shiny black feathers.</p>

<p id="id01509">The boy cautiously retreated into a crevice of the rock. His adventure
in being kidnapped by crows was still fresh in his memory, and he did
not care to show himself when there was no need of it.</p>

<p id="id01510">The bird strode back and forth beside the snake's body, and turned it
over with his beak. Finally he spread his wings and began to shriek in
ear-splitting tones:</p>

<p id="id01511">"It is certainly Helpless, the water-snake, that lies dead here!" Once
more he walked the length of the snake; then he stood in a deep study,
and scratched his neck with his foot.</p>

<p id="id01512">"It isn't possible that there can be two such big snakes in the forest,"
he pondered. "It must surely be Helpless!"</p>

<p id="id01513">He was just going to thrust his beak into the snake, but suddenly
checked himself.</p>

<p id="id01514">"You mustn't be a numbskull, Bataki!" he remarked to himself. "Surely
you cannot be thinking of eating the snake until you have called Karr!
He wouldn't believe that Helpless was dead unless he could see it with
his own eyes."</p>

<p id="id01515">The boy tried to keep quiet, but the bird was so ludicrously solemn, as
he stalked back and forth chattering to himself, that he had to laugh.</p>

<p id="id01516">The bird heard him, and, with a flap of his wings, he was up on the
rock. The boy rose quickly and walked toward him.</p>

<p id="id01517">"Are you not the one who is called Bataki, the raven? and are you not a
friend of Akka from Kebnekaise?" asked the boy.</p>

<p id="id01518">The bird regarded him intently; then nodded three times.</p>

<p id="id01519">"Surely, you're not the little chap who flies around with the wild
geese, and whom they call Thumbietot?"</p>

<p id="id01520">"Oh, you're not so far out of the way," said the boy.</p>

<p id="id01521">"What luck that I should have run across you! Perhaps you can tell me
who killed this water-snake?"</p>

<p id="id01522">"The stone which I rolled down on him killed him," replied the boy, and
related how the whole thing happened.</p>

<p id="id01523">"That was cleverly done for one who is as tiny as you are!" said the
raven. "I have a friend in these parts who will be glad to know that
this snake has been killed, and I should like to render you a service in
return."</p>

<p id="id01524">"Then tell me why you are glad the water-snake is dead," responded the
boy.</p>

<p id="id01525">"It's a long story," said the raven; "you wouldn't have the patience to
listen to it."</p>

<p id="id01526">But the boy insisted that he had, and then the raven told him the whole
story about Karr and Grayskin and Helpless, the water-snake. When he had
finished, the boy sat quietly for a moment, looking straight ahead. Then
he spoke:</p>

<p id="id01527">"I seem to like the forest better since hearing this. I wonder if there
is anything left of the old Liberty Forest."'</p>

<p id="id01528">"Most of it has been destroyed," said Bataki. "The trees look as if they
had passed through a fire. They'll have to be cleared away, and it will
take many years before the forest will be what it once was."</p>

<p id="id01529">"That snake deserved his death!" declared the boy. "But I wonder if it
could be possible that he was so wise he could send sickness to the
caterpillars?"</p>

<p id="id01530">"Perhaps he knew that they frequently became sick in that way,"
intimated Bataki.</p>

<p id="id01531">"Yes, that may be; but all the same, I must say that he was a very wily
snake."</p>

<p id="id01532">The boy stopped talking because he saw the raven was not listening to
him, but sitting with gaze averted. "Hark!" he said. "Karr is in the
vicinity. Won't he be happy when he sees that Helpless is dead!"</p>

<p id="id01533">The boy turned his head in the direction of the sound.</p>

<p id="id01534">"He's talking with the wild geese," he said.</p>

<p id="id01535">"Oh, you may be sure that he has dragged himself down to the strand to
get the latest news about Grayskin!"</p>

<p id="id01536">Both the boy and the raven jumped to the ground, and hastened down to
the shore. All the geese had come out of the lake, and stood talking
with an old dog, who was so weak and decrepit that it seemed as if he
might drop dead at any moment.</p>

<p id="id01537">"There's Karr," said Bataki to the boy. "Let him hear first what the
wild geese have to say to him; later we shall tell him that the
water-snake is dead."</p>

<p id="id01538">Presently they heard Akka talking to Karr.</p>

<p id="id01539">"It happened last year while we were making our usual spring trip,"
remarked the leader-goose. "We started out one morning—Yksi, Kaksi, and
I, and we flew over the great boundary forests between Dalecarlia and
Hälsingland. Under us we, saw only thick pine forests. The snow was
still deep among the trees, and the creeks were mostly frozen.</p>

<p id="id01540">"Suddenly we noticed three poachers down in the forest! They were on
skis, had dogs in leash, carried knives in their belts, but had no guns.</p>

<p id="id01541">"As there was a hard crust on the snow, they did not bother to take the
winding forest paths, but skied straight ahead. Apparently they knew
very well where they must go to find what they were seeking.</p>

<p id="id01542">"We wild geese flew on, high up in the air, so that the whole forest
under us was visible. When we sighted the poachers we wanted to find out
where the game was, so we circled up and down, peering through the
trees. Then, in a dense thicket, we saw something that looked like big,
moss-covered rocks, but couldn't be rocks, for there was no snow on
them.</p>

<p id="id01543">"We shot down, suddenly, and lit in the centre of the thicket. The three
rocks moved. They were three elk—a bull and two cows—resting in the
bleak forest.</p>

<p id="id01544">"When we alighted, the elk bull rose and came toward us. He was the
most superb animal we had ever seen. When he saw that it was only some
poor wild geese that had awakened him, he lay down again.</p>

<p id="id01545">"'No, old granddaddy, you mustn't go back to sleep!' I cried. 'Flee as
fast as you can! There are poachers in the forest, and they are bound
for this very deer fold.'</p>

<p id="id01546">"'Thank you, goose mother!' said the elk. He seemed to be dropping to
sleep while he was speaking. 'But surely you must know that we elk are
under the protection of the law at this time of the year. Those poachers
are probably out for fox,' he yawned.</p>

<p id="id01547">"'There are plenty of fox trails in the forest, but the poachers are not
looking for them. Believe me, old granddaddy! They know that you are
lying here, and are coming to attack you. They have no guns with
them—only spears and knives—for they dare not fire a shot at this
season.'</p>

<p id="id01548">"The elk bull lay there calmly, but the elk cows seemed to feel uneasy.</p>

<p id="id01549">"'It may be as the geese say,' they remarked, beginning to bestir
themselves.</p>

<p id="id01550">"'You just lie down!' said the elk bull. 'There are no poachers coming
here; of that you may be certain.'</p>

<p id="id01551">"There was nothing more to be done, so we wild geese rose again into the
air. But we continued to circle over the place, to see how it would turn
out for the elk.</p>

<p id="id01552">"We had hardly reached our regular flying altitude, when we saw the elk
bull come out from the thicket. He sniffed the air a little, then walked
straight toward the poachers. As he strode along he stepped upon dry
twigs that crackled noisily. A big barren marsh lay just beyond him.
Thither he went and took his stand in the middle, where there was
nothing to hide him from view.</p>

<p id="id01553">"There he stood until the poachers emerged from the woods. Then he
turned and fled in the opposite direction. The poachers let loose the
dogs, and they themselves skied after him at full speed.</p>

<p id="id01554">"The elk threw back his head and loped as fast as he could. He kicked up
snow until it flew like a blizzard about him. Both dogs and men were
left far behind. Then the elk stopped, as if to await their approach.
When they were within sight he dashed ahead again. We understood that he
was purposely tempting the hunters away from the place where the cows
were. We thought it brave of him to face danger himself, in order that
those who were dear to him might be left in safety. None of us wanted to
leave the place until we had seen how all this was to end.</p>

<p id="id01555">"Thus the chase continued for two hours or more. We wondered that the
poachers went to the trouble of pursuing the elk when they were not
armed with rifles. They couldn't have thought that they could succeed in
tiring out a runner like him!</p>

<p id="id01556">"Then we noticed that the elk no longer ran so rapidly. He stepped on
the snow more carefully, and every time he lifted his feet, blood could
be seen in his tracks.</p>

<p id="id01557">"We understood why the poachers had been so persistent! They had
counted on help from the snow. The elk was heavy, and with every step he
sank to the bottom of the drift. The hard crust on the snow was scraping
his legs. It scraped away the fur, and tore out pieces of flesh, so that
he was in torture every time he put his foot down.</p>

<p id="id01558">"The poachers and the dogs, who were so light that the ice crust could
hold their weight, pursued him all the while. He ran on and on—his
steps becoming more and more uncertain and faltering. He gasped for
breath. Not only did he suffer intense pain, but he was also exhausted
from wading through the deep snowdrifts.</p>

<p id="id01559">"At last he lost all patience. He paused to let poachers and dogs come
upon him, and was ready to fight them. As he stood there waiting, he
glanced upward. When he saw us wild geese circling above him, he cried
out:</p>

<p id="id01560">"'Stay here, wild geese, until all is over! And the next time you fly
over Kolmården, look up Karr, and ask him if he doesn't think that his
friend Grayskin has met with a happy end?'"</p>

<p id="id01561">When Akka had gone so far in her story the old dog rose and walked
nearer to her.</p>

<p id="id01562">"Grayskin led a good life," he said. "He understands me. He knows that
I'm a brave dog, and that I shall be glad to hear that he had a happy
end. Now tell me how—"</p>

<p id="id01563">He raised his tail and threw back his head, as if to give himself a bold
and proud bearing—then he collapsed.</p>

<p id="id01564">"Karr! Karr!" called a man's voice from the forest.</p>

<p id="id01565">The old dog rose obediently.</p>

<p id="id01566">"My master is calling me," he said, "and I must not tarry longer. I just
saw him load his gun. Now we two are going into the forest for the last
time.</p>

<p id="id01567">"Many thanks, wild goose! I know everything that I need know to die
content!"</p>

<h4 id="id01568" style="margin-top: 2em">THE WIND WITCH</h4>

<h4 id="id01569" style="margin-top: 2em">IN NÄRKE</h4>

<p id="id01570">In bygone days there was something in Närke the like of which was not to
be found elsewhere: it was a witch, named Ysätter-Kaisa.</p>

<p id="id01571">The name Kaisa had been given her because she had a good deal to do with
wind and storm—and these wind witches are always so called. The surname
was added because she was supposed to have come from Ysätter swamp in
Asker parish.</p>

<p id="id01572">It seemed as though her real abode must have been at Asker; but she used
also to appear at other places. Nowhere in all Närke could one be sure
of not meeting her.</p>

<p id="id01573">She was no dark, mournful witch, but gay and frolicsome; and what she
loved most of all was a gale of wind. As soon as there was wind enough,
off she would fly to the Närke plain for a good dance. On days when a
whirlwind swept the plain, Ysätter-Kaisa had fun! She would stand right
in the wind and spin round, her long hair flying up among the clouds and
the long trail of her robe sweeping the ground, like a dust cloud, while
the whole plain lay spread out under her, like a ballroom floor.</p>

<p id="id01574">Of a morning Ysätter-Kaisa would sit up in some tall pine at the top of
a precipice, and look across the plain. If it happened to be winter and
she saw many teams on the roads she hurriedly blew up a blizzard, piling
the drifts so high that people could barely get back to their homes by
evening. If it chanced to be summer and good harvest weather,
Ysätter-Kaisa would sit quietly until the first hayricks had been
loaded, then down she would come with a couple of heavy showers, which
put an end to the work for that day.</p>

<p id="id01575">It was only too true that she seldom thought of anything else than
raising mischief. The charcoal burners up in the Kil mountains hardly
dared take a cat-nap, for as soon as she saw an unwatched kiln, she
stole up and blew on it until it began to burn in a great flame. If the
metal drivers from Laxå and Svartå were out late of an evening,
Ysätter-Kaisa would veil the roads and the country round about in such
dark clouds that both men and horses lost their way and drove the heavy
trucks down into swamps and morasses.</p>

<p id="id01576">If, on a summer's day, the dean's wife at Glanshammar had spread the tea
table in the garden and along would come a gust of wind that lifted the
cloth from the table and turned over cups and saucers, they knew who had
raised the mischief! If the mayor of Örebro's hat blew off, so that he
had to run across the whole square after it; if the wash on the line
blew away and got covered with dirt, or if the smoke poured into the
cabins and seemed unable to find its way out through the chimney, it was
easy enough to guess who was out making merry!</p>

<p id="id01577">Although Ysätter-Kaisa was fond of all sorts of tantalizing games, there
was nothing really bad about her. One could see that she was hardest on
those who were quarrelsome, stingy, or wicked; while honest folk and
poor little children she would take under her wing. Old people say of
her that, once, when Asker church was burning, Ysätter-Kaisa swept
through the air, lit amid fire and smoke on the church roof, and averted
the disaster.</p>

<p id="id01578">All the same the Närke folk were often rather tired of Ysätter-Kaisa,
but she never tired of playing her tricks on them. As she sat on the
edge of a cloud and looked down upon Närke, which rested so peacefully
and comfortably beneath her, she must have thought: "The inhabitants
would fare much too well if I were not in existence. They would grow
sleepy and dull. There must be some one like myself to rouse them and
keep them in good spirits."</p>

<p id="id01579">Then she would laugh wildly and, chattering like a magpie, would rush
off, dancing and spinning from one end of the plain to the other. When a
Närke man saw her come dragging her dust trail over the plain, he could
not help smiling. Provoking and tiresome she certainly was, but she had
a merry spirit. It was just as refreshing for the peasants to meet
Ysätter-Kaisa as it was for the plain to be lashed by the windstorm.</p>

<p id="id01580">Nowadays 'tis said that Ysätter-Kaisa is dead and gone, like all other
witches, but this one can hardly believe. It is as if some one were to
come and tell you that henceforth the air would always be still on the
plain, and the wind would never more dance across it with blustering
breezes and drenching showers.</p>

<p id="id01581">He who fancies that Ysätter-Kaisa is dead and gone may as well hear what
occurred in Närke the year that Nils Holgersson travelled over that part
of the country. Then let him tell what he thinks about it.</p>

<h5 id="id01582">MARKET EVE</h5>

<p id="id01583"><i>Wednesday, April twenty-seventh</i>.</p>

<p id="id01584">It was the day before the big Cattle Fair at Örebro; it rained in
torrents and people thought: "This is exactly as in Ysätter-Kaisa's
time! At fairs she used to be more prankish than usual. It was quite in
her line to arrange a downpour like this on a market eve."</p>

<p id="id01585">As the day wore on, the rain increased, and toward evening came regular
cloud-bursts. The roads were like bottomless swamps. The farmers who had
started from home with their cattle early in the morning, that they
might arrive at a seasonable hour, fared badly. Cows and oxen were so
tired they could hardly move, and many of the poor beasts dropped down
in the middle of the road, to show that they were too exhausted to go
any farther. All who lived along the roadside had to open their doors to
the market-bound travellers, and harbour them as best they could. Farm
houses, barns, and sheds were soon crowded to their limit.</p>

<p id="id01586">Meanwhile, those who could struggle along toward the inn did so; but
when they arrived they wished they had stopped at some cabin along the
road. All the cribs in the barn and all the stalls in the stable were
already occupied. There was no other choice than to let horses and
cattle stand out in the rain. Their masters could barely manage to get
under cover.</p>

<p id="id01587">The crush and mud and slush in the barn yard were frightful! Some of the
animals were standing in puddles and could not even lie down. There were
thoughtful masters, of course, who procured straw for their animals to
lie on, and spread blankets over them; but there were those, also, who
sat in the inn, drinking and gambling, entirely forgetful of the dumb
creatures which they should have protected.</p>

<p id="id01588">The boy and the wild geese had come to a little wooded island in Hjälmar
Lake that evening. The island was separated from the main land by a
narrow and shallow stream, and at low tide one could pass over it
dry-shod.</p>

<p id="id01589">It rained just as hard on the island as it did everywhere else. The boy
could not sleep for the water that kept dripping down on him. Finally he
got up and began to walk. He fancied that he felt the rain less when he
moved about.</p>

<p id="id01590">He had hardly circled the island, when he heard a splashing in the
stream. Presently he saw a solitary horse tramping among the trees.
Never in all his life had he seen such a wreck of a horse! He was
broken-winded and stiff-kneed and so thin that every rib could be seen
under the hide. He bore neither harness nor saddle—only an old bridle,
from which dangled a half-rotted rope-end. Obviously he had had no
difficulty in breaking loose.</p>

<p id="id01591">The horse walked straight toward the spot where the wild geese were
sleeping. The boy was afraid that he would step on them.</p>

<p id="id01592">"Where are you going? Feel your ground!" shouted the boy.</p>

<p id="id01593">"Oh, there you are!" exclaimed the horse. "I've walked miles to meet
you!"</p>

<p id="id01594">"Have you heard of me?" asked the boy, astonished.</p>

<p id="id01595">"I've got ears, even if I am old! There are many who talk of you
nowadays."</p>

<p id="id01596">As he spoke, the horse bent his head that he might see better, and the
boy noticed that he had a small head, beautiful eyes, and a soft,
sensitive nose.</p>

<p id="id01597">"He must have been a good horse at the start, though he has come to
grief in his old age," he thought.</p>

<p id="id01598">"I wish you would come with me and help me with something," pleaded the
horse.</p>

<p id="id01599">The boy thought it would be embarrassing to accompany a creature who
looked so wretched, and excused himself on account of the bad weather.</p>

<p id="id01600">"You'll be no worse off on my back than you are lying here," said the
horse. "But perhaps you don't dare to go with an old tramp of a horse
like me."</p>

<p id="id01601">"Certainly I dare!" said the boy.</p>

<p id="id01602">"Then wake the geese, so that we can arrange with them where they shall
come for you to-morrow," said the horse.</p>

<p id="id01603">The boy was soon seated on the animal's back. The old nag trotted along
better than he had thought possible. It was a long ride in the rain and
darkness before they halted near a large inn, where everything looked
terribly uninviting! The wheel tracks were so deep in the road that the
boy feared he might drown should he fall down into them. Alongside the
fence, which enclosed the yard, some thirty or forty horses and cattle
were tied, with no protection against the rain, and in the yard were
wagons piled with packing cases, where sheep, calves, hogs, and chickens
were shut in.</p>

<p id="id01604">The horse walked over to the fence and stationed himself. The boy
remained seated upon his back, and, with his good night eyes, plainly
saw how badly the animals fared.</p>

<p id="id01605">"How do you happen to be standing out here in the rain?" he asked.</p>

<p id="id01606">"We're on our way to a fair at Örebro, but we were obliged to put up
here on account of the rain. This is an inn; but so many travellers have
already arrived that there's no room for us in the barns."</p>

<p id="id01607">The boy made no reply, but sat quietly looking about him. Not many of
the animals were asleep, and on all sides he heard complaints and
indignant protests. They had reason enough for grumbling, for the
weather was even worse than it had been earlier in the day. A freezing
wind had begun to blow, and the rain which came beating down on them
was turning to snow. It was easy enough to understand what the horse
wanted the boy to help him with.</p>

<p id="id01608">"Do you see that fine farm yard directly opposite the inn?" remarked the
horse.</p>

<p id="id01609">"Yes, I see it," answered the boy, "and I can't comprehend why they
haven't tried to find shelter for all of you in there. They are already
full, perhaps?"</p>

<p id="id01610">"No, there are no strangers in that place," said the horse. "The people
who live on that farm are so stingy and selfish that it would be useless
for any one to ask them for harbour."</p>

<p id="id01611">"If that's the case, I suppose you'll have to stand where you are."</p>

<p id="id01612">"I was born and raised on that farm," said the horse; "I know that there
is a large barn and a big cow shed, with many empty stalls and mangers,
and I was wondering if you couldn't manage in some way or other to get
us in over there."</p>

<p id="id01613">"I don't think I could venture—" hesitated the boy. But he felt so
sorry for the poor beasts that he wanted at least to try.</p>

<p id="id01614">He ran into the strange barn yard and saw at once that all the outhouses
were locked and the keys gone. He stood there, puzzled and helpless,
when aid came to him from an unexpected source. A gust of wind came
sweeping along with terrific force and flung open a shed door right in
front of him.</p>

<p id="id01615">The boy was not long in getting back to the horse.</p>

<p id="id01616">"It isn't possible to get into the barn or the cow house," he said, "but
there's a big, empty hay shed that they have forgotten to bolt. I can
lead you into that."</p>

<p id="id01617">"Thank you!" said the horse. "It will seem good to sleep once more on
familiar ground. It's the only happiness I can expect in this life."</p>

<p id="id01618">Meanwhile, at the flourishing farm opposite the inn, the family sat up
much later than usual that evening.</p>

<p id="id01619">The master of the place was a man of thirty-five, tall and dignified,
with a handsome but melancholy face. During the day he had been out in
the rain and had got wet, like every one else, and at supper he asked
his old mother, who was still mistress of the place, to light a fire on
the hearth that he might dry his clothes. The mother kindled a feeble
blaze—for in that house they were not wasteful with wood—and the
master hung his coat on the back of a chair, and placed it before the
fire. With one foot on top of the andiron and a hand resting on his
knee, he stood gazing into the embers. Thus he stood for two whole
hours, making no move other than to cast a log on the fire now and then.</p>

<p id="id01620">The mistress removed the supper things and turned down his bed for the
night before she went to her own room and seated herself. At intervals
she came to the door and looked wonderingly at her son.</p>

<p id="id01621">"It's nothing, mother. I'm only thinking," he said.</p>

<p id="id01622">His thoughts were on something that had occurred shortly before: When he
passed the inn a horse dealer had asked him if he would not like to
purchase a horse, and had shown him an old nag so weather-beaten that he
asked the dealer if he took him for a fool, since he wished to palm off
such a played-out beast on him.</p>

<p id="id01623">"Oh, no!" said the horse dealer. "I only thought that, inasmuch as the
horse once belonged to you, you might wish to give him a comfortable
home in his old age; he has need of it."</p>

<p id="id01624">Then he looked at the horse and recognized it as one which he himself
had raised and broken in; but it did not occur to him to purchase such
an old and useless creature on that account. No, indeed! He was not one
who squandered his money.</p>

<p id="id01625">All the same, the sight of the horse had awakened many, memories—and it
was the memories that kept him awake.</p>

<p id="id01626">That horse had been a fine animal. His father had let him tend it from
the start. He had broken it in and had loved it above everything else.
His father had complained that he used to feed it too well, and often he
had been obliged to steal out and smuggle oats to it.</p>

<p id="id01627">Once, when he ventured to talk with his father about letting him buy a
broadcloth suit, or having the cart painted, his father stood as if
petrified, and he thought the old man would have a stroke. He tried to
make his father understand that, when he had a fine horse to drive, he
should look presentable himself.</p>

<p id="id01628">The father made no reply, but two days later he took the horse to Örebro
and sold it.</p>

<p id="id01629">It was cruel of him. But it was plain that his father had feared that
this horse might lead him into vanity and extravagance. And now, so long
afterward, he had to admit that his father was right. A horse like that
surely would have been a temptation. At first he had grieved terribly
over his loss. Many a time he had gone down to Örebro, just to stand on
a street corner and see the horse pass by, or to steal into the stable
and give him a lump of sugar. He thought: "If I ever get the farm, the
first thing I do will be to buy back my horse."</p>

<p id="id01630">Now his father was gone and he himself had been master for two years,
but he had not made a move toward buying the horse. He had not thought
of him for ever so long, until to-night.</p>

<p id="id01631">It was strange that he should have forgotten the beast so entirely!</p>

<p id="id01632">His father had been a very headstrong, domineering man. When his son was
grown and the two had worked together, the father had gained absolute
power over him. The boy had come to think that everything his father did
was right, and, after he became the master, he only tried to do exactly
as his father would have done.</p>

<p id="id01633">He knew, of course, that folk said his father was stingy; but it was
well to keep a tight hold on one's purse and not throw away money
needlessly. The goods one has received should not be wasted. It was
better to live on a debt-free place and be called stingy, than to carry
heavy mortgages, like other farm owners.</p>

<p id="id01634">He had gone so far in his mind when he was called back by a strange
sound. It was as if a shrill, mocking voice were repeating his thoughts:
"It's better to keep a firm hold on one's purse and be called stingy,
than to be in debt, like other farm owners."</p>

<p id="id01635">It sounded as if some one was trying to make sport of his wisdom and he
was about to lose his temper, when he realized that it was all a
mistake. The wind was beginning to rage, and he had been standing there
getting so sleepy that he mistook the howling of the wind in the chimney
for human speech.</p>

<p id="id01636">He glanced up at the wall clock, which just then struck eleven.</p>

<p id="id01637">"It's time that you were in bed," he remarked to himself. Then he
remembered that he had not yet gone the rounds of the farm yard, as it
was his custom to do every night, to make sure that all doors were
closed and all lights extinguished. This was something he had never
neglected since he became master. He drew on his coat and went out in
the storm.</p>

<p id="id01638">He found everything as it should be, save that the door to the empty hay
shed had been blown open by the wind. He stepped inside for the key,
locked the shed door and put the key into his coat pocket. Then he went
back to the house, removed his coat, and hung it before the fire. Even
now he did not retire, but began pacing the floor. The storm without,
with its biting wind and snow-blended rain, was terrible, and his old
horse was standing in this storm without so much as a blanket to protect
him! He should at least have given his old friend a roof over his head,
since he had come such a long distance.</p>

<p id="id01639">At the inn across the way the boy heard an old wall clock strike eleven
times. Just then he was untying the animals to lead them to the shed in
the farm yard opposite. It took some time to rouse them and get them
into line. When all were ready, they marched in a long procession into
the stingy farmer's yard, with the boy as their guide. While the boy had
been assembling them, the farmer had gone the rounds of the farm yard
and locked the hay shed, so that when the animals came along the door
was closed. The boy stood there dismayed. He could not let the creatures
stand out there! He must go into the house and find the key.</p>

<p id="id01640">"Keep them quiet out here while I go in and fetch the key!" he said to
the old horse, and off he ran.</p>

<p id="id01641">On the path right in front of the house he paused to think out how he
should get inside. As he stood there he noticed two little wanderers
coming down the road, who stopped before the inn.</p>

<p id="id01642">The boy saw at once that they were two little girls, and ran toward
them.</p>

<p id="id01643">"Come now, Britta Maja!" said one, "you mustn't cry any more. Now we are
at the inn. Here they will surely take us in."</p>

<p id="id01644">The girl had but just said this when the boy called to her:</p>

<p id="id01645">"No, you mustn't try to get in there. It is simply impossible. But at
the farm house opposite there are no guests. Go there instead."</p>

<p id="id01646">The little girls heard the words distinctly, though they could not see
the one who spoke to them. They did not wonder much at that, however,
for the night was as black as pitch. The larger of the girls promptly
answered:</p>

<p id="id01647">"We don't care to enter that place, because those who live there are
stingy and cruel. It is their fault that we two must go out on the
highways and beg."</p>

<p id="id01648">"That may be so," said the boy, "but all the same you should go there.<br>

You shall see that it will be well for you."<br>
</p>

<p id="id01649">"We can try, but it is doubtful that they will even let us enter,"
observed the two little girls as they walked up to the house and
knocked.</p>

<p id="id01650">The master was standing by the fire thinking of the horse when he heard
the knocking. He stepped to the door to see what was up, thinking all
the while that he would not let himself be tempted into admitting any
wayfarer. As he fumbled the lock, a gust of wind came along, wrenched
the door from his hand and swung it open. To close it, he had to step
out on the porch, and, when he stepped back into the house, the two
little girls were standing within.</p>

<p id="id01651">They were two poor beggar girls, ragged, dirty, and starving—two little
tots bent under the burden of their beggar's packs, which were as large
as themselves.</p>

<p id="id01652">"Who are you that go prowling about at this hour of the night?" said the
master gruffly.</p>

<p id="id01653">The two children did not answer immediately, but first removed their
packs. Then they walked up to the man and stretched forth their tiny
hands in greeting.</p>

<p id="id01654">"We are Anna and Britta Maja from the Engärd," said the elder, "and we
were going to ask for a night's lodging."</p>

<p id="id01655">He did not take the outstretched hands and was just about to drive out
the beggar children, when a fresh recollection faced him. Engärd—was
not that a little cabin where a poor widow with five children had lived?
The widow had owed his father a few hundred kroner and in order to get
back his money he had sold her cabin. After that the widow, with her
three eldest children, went to Norrland to seek employment, and the two
youngest became a charge on the parish.</p>

<p id="id01656">As he called this to mind he grew bitter. He knew that his father had
been severely censured for squeezing out that money, which by right
belonged to him.</p>

<p id="id01657">"What are you doing nowadays?" he asked in a cross tone. "Didn't the
board of charities take charge of you? Why do you roam around and beg?"</p>

<p id="id01658">"It's not our fault," replied the larger girl. "The people with whom we
are living have sent us out to beg."</p>

<p id="id01659">"Well, your packs are filled," the farmer observed, "so you can't
complain. Now you'd better take out some of the food you have with you
and eat your fill, for here you'll get no food, as all the women folk
are in bed. Later you may lie down in the corner by the hearth, so you
won't have to freeze."</p>

<p id="id01660">He waved his hand, as if to ward them off, and his eyes took on a hard
look. He was thankful that he had had a father who had been careful of
his property. Otherwise, he might perhaps have been forced in childhood
to run about and beg, as these children now did.</p>

<p id="id01661">No sooner had he thought this out to the end than the shrill, mocking
voice he had heard once before that evening repeated it, word for word.</p>

<p id="id01662">He listened, and at once understood that it was nothing—only the wind
roaring in the chimney. But the queer thing about it was, when the wind
repeated his thoughts, they seemed so strangely stupid and hard and
false!</p>

<p id="id01663">The children meanwhile had stretched themselves, side by side, on the
floor. They were not quiet, but lay there muttering.</p>

<p id="id01664">"Do be still, won't you?" he growled, for he was in such an irritable
mood that he could have beaten them.</p>

<p id="id01665">But the mumbling continued, and again he called for silence.</p>

<p id="id01666">"When mother went away," piped a clear little voice, "she made me
promise that every night I would say my evening prayer. I must do this,
and Britta Maja too. As soon as we have said 'God who cares for little
children—' we'll be quiet."</p>

<p id="id01667">The master sat quite still while the little ones said their prayers,
then he rose and began pacing back and forth, back and forth, wringing
his hands all the while, as though he had met with some great sorrow.</p>

<p id="id01668">"The horse driven out and wrecked, these two children turned into road
beggars—both father's doings! Perhaps father did not do right after
all?" he thought.</p>

<p id="id01669">He sat down again and buried his head in his hands. Suddenly his lips
began to quiver and into his eyes came tears, which he hastily wiped
away. Fresh tears came, and he was just as prompt to brush these away;
but it was useless, for more followed.</p>

<p id="id01670">When his mother stepped into the room, he swung his chair quickly and
turned his back to her. She must have noticed something unusual, for she
stood quietly behind him a long while, as if waiting for him to speak.
She realized how difficult it always is for men to talk of the things
they feel most deeply. She must help him of course.</p>

<p id="id01671">From her bedroom she had observed all that had taken place in the living
room, so that she did not have to ask questions. She walked very softly
over to the two sleeping children, lifted them, and bore them to her own
bed. Then she went back to her son.</p>

<p id="id01672">"Lars," she said, as if she did not see that he was weeping, "you had
better let me keep these children."</p>

<p id="id01673">"What, mother?" he gasped, trying to smother the sobs.</p>

<p id="id01674">"I have been suffering for years—ever since father took the cabin from
their mother, and so have you."</p>

<p id="id01675">"Yes, but—"</p>

<p id="id01676">"I want to keep them here and make something of them; they are too good
to beg."</p>

<p id="id01677">He could not speak, for now the tears were beyond his control; but he
took his old mother's withered hand and patted it.</p>

<p id="id01678">Then he jumped up, as if something had frightened him.</p>

<p id="id01679">"What would father have said of this?"</p>

<p id="id01680">"Father had his day at ruling," retorted the mother. "Now it is your
day. As long as father lived we had to obey him. Now is the time to show
what you are."</p>

<p id="id01681">Her son was so astonished that he ceased crying.</p>

<p id="id01682">"But I have just shown what I am!" he returned.</p>

<p id="id01683">"No, you haven't," protested the mother. "You only try to be like him.
Father experienced hard times, which made him fear poverty. He believed
that he had to think of himself first. But you have never had any
difficulties that should make you hard. You have more than you need, and
it would be unnatural of you not to think of others."</p>

<p id="id01684">When the two little girls entered the house the boy slipped in behind
them and secreted himself in a dark corner. He had not been there long
before he caught a glimpse of the shed key, which the farmer had thrust
into his coat pocket.</p>

<p id="id01685">"When the master of the house drives the children out, I'll take the key
and ran," he thought.</p>

<p id="id01686">But the children were not driven out and the boy crouched in the corner,
not knowing what he should do next.</p>

<p id="id01687">The mother talked long with her son, and while she was speaking he
stopped weeping. Gradually his features softened; he looked like another
person. All the while he was stroking the wasted old hand.</p>

<p id="id01688">"Now we may as well retire," said the old lady when she saw that he was
calm again.</p>

<p id="id01689">"No," he said, suddenly rising, "I cannot retire yet. There's a stranger
without whom I must shelter to-night!"</p>

<p id="id01690">He said nothing further, but quickly drew on his coat, lit the lantern
and went out. There were the same wind and chill without, but as he
stepped to the porch he began to sing softly. He wondered if the horse
would know him, and if he would be glad to come back to his old stable.</p>

<p id="id01691">As he crossed the house yard he heard a door slam.</p>

<p id="id01692">"That shed door has blown open again," he thought, and went over to
close it.</p>

<p id="id01693">A moment later he stood by the shed and was just going to shut the door,
when he heard a rustling within.</p>

<p id="id01694">The boy, who had watched his opportunity, had run directly to the shed,
where he left the animals, but they were no longer out in the rain: A
strong wind had long since thrown open the door and helped them to get a
roof over their heads. The patter which the master heard was occasioned
by the boy running into the shed.</p>

<p id="id01695">By the light of the lantern the man could see into the shed. The whole
floor was covered with sleeping cattle. There was no human being to be
seen; the animals were not bound, but were lying, here and there, in the
straw.</p>

<p id="id01696">He was enraged at the intrusion and began storming and shrieking to
rouse the sleepers and drive them out. But the creatures lay still and
would not let themselves be disturbed. The only one that rose was an old
horse that came slowly toward him.</p>

<p id="id01697">All of a sudden the man became silent. He recognized the beast by its
gait. He raised the lantern, and the horse came over and laid its head
on his shoulder. The master patted and stroked it.</p>

<p id="id01698">"My old horsy, my old horsy!" he said. "What have they done to you? Yes,
dear, I'll buy you back. You'll never again have to leave this place.
You shall do whatever you like, horsy mine! Those whom you have brought
with you may remain here, but you shall come with me to the stable. Now
I can give you all the oats you are able to eat, without having to
smuggle them. And you're not all used up, either! The handsomest horse
on the church knoll—that's what you shall be once more! There, there!
There, there!"</p>

<h4 id="id01699" style="margin-top: 2em">THE BREAKING UP OF THE ICE</h4>

<p id="id01700" style="margin-top: 2em"><i>Thursday, April twenty-eighth</i>.</p>

<p id="id01701">The following day the weather was clear and beautiful. There was a
strong west wind; people were glad of that, for it dried up the roads,
which had been soaked by the heavy rains of the day before.</p>

<p id="id01702">Early in the morning the two Småland children, Osa, the goose girl, and
little Mats, were out on the highway leading from Sörmland to Närke. The
road ran alongside the southern shore of Hjälmar Lake and the children
were walking along looking at the ice, which covered the greater part of
it. The morning sun darted its clear rays upon the ice, which did not
look dark and forbidding, like most spring ice, but sparkled temptingly.
As far as they could see, the ice was firm and dry. The rain had run
down into cracks and hollows, or been absorbed by the ice itself. The
children saw only the sound ice.</p>

<p id="id01703">Osa, the goose girl, and little Mats were on their way North, and they
could not help thinking of all the steps they would be saved if they
could cut straight across the lake instead of going around it. They
knew, to be sure, that spring ice is treacherous, but this looked
perfectly secure. They could see that it was several inches thick near
the shore. They saw a path which they might follow, and the opposite
shore appeared to be so near that they ought to be able to get there in
an hour.</p>

<p id="id01704">"Come, let's try!" said little Mats. "If we only look before us, so that
we don't go down into some hole, we can do it."</p>

<p id="id01705">So they went out on the lake. The ice was not very slippery, but rather
easy to walk upon. There was more water on it than they expected to see,
and here and there were cracks, where the water purled up. One had to
watch out for such places; but that was easy to do in broad daylight,
with the sun shining.</p>

<p id="id01706">The children advanced rapidly, and talked only of how sensible they were
to have gone out on the ice instead of tramping the slushy road.</p>

<p id="id01707">When they had been walking a while they came to Vin Island, where an old
woman had sighted them from her window. She rushed from her cabin, waved
them back, and shouted something which they could not hear. They
understood perfectly well that she was warning them not to come any
farther; but they thought there was no immediate danger. It would be
stupid for them to leave the ice when all was going so well!</p>

<p id="id01708">Therefore they went on past Vin Island and had a stretch of seven miles
of ice ahead of them.</p>

<p id="id01709">Out there was so much water that the children were obliged to take
roundabout ways; but that was sport to them. They vied with each other
as to which could find the soundest ice. They were neither tired nor
hungry. The whole day was before them, and they laughed at each obstacle
they met.</p>

<p id="id01710">Now and then they cast a glance ahead at the farther shore. It still
appeared far away, although they had been walking a good hour. They were
rather surprised that the lake was so broad.</p>

<p id="id01711">"The shore seems to be moving farther away from us," little Mats
observed.</p>

<p id="id01712">Out there the children were not protected against the wind, which was
becoming stronger and stronger every minute, and was pressing their
clothing so close to their bodies that they could hardly go on. The cold
wind was the first disagreeable thing they had met with on the journey.</p>

<p id="id01713">But the amazing part of it was that the wind came sweeping along with a
loud roar—as if it brought with it the noise of a large mill or
factory, though nothing of the kind was to be found out there on the
ice. They had walked to the west of the big island, Valen; now they
thought they were nearing the north shore. Suddenly the wind began to
blow more and more, while the loud roaring increased so rapidly that
they began to feel uneasy.</p>

<p id="id01714">All at once it occurred to them that the roar was caused by the foaming
and rushing of the waves breaking against a shore. Even this seemed
improbable, since the lake was still covered with ice.</p>

<p id="id01715">At all events, they paused and looked about. They noticed far in the
west a white bank which stretched clear across the lake. At first they
thought it was a snowbank alongside a road. Later they realized it was
the foam-capped waves dashing against the ice! They took hold of hands
and ran without saying a word. Open sea lay beyond in the west, and
suddenly the streak of foam appeared to be moving eastward. They
wondered if the ice was going to break all over. What was going to
happen? They felt now that they were in great danger.</p>

<p id="id01716">All at once it seemed as if the ice under their feet rose—rose and
sank, as if some one from below were pushing it. Presently they heard a
hollow boom, and then there were cracks in the ice all around them. The
children could see how they crept along under the ice-covering.</p>

<p id="id01717">The next moment all was still, then the rising and sinking began again.
Thereupon the cracks began to widen into crevices through which the
water bubbled up. By and by the crevices became gaps. Soon after that
the ice was divided into large floes.</p>

<p id="id01718">"Osa," said little Mats, "this must be the breaking up of the ice!"</p>

<p id="id01719">"Why, so it is, little Mats," said Osa, "but as yet we can get to land.<br>

Run for your life!"<br>
</p>

<p id="id01720">As a matter of fact, the wind and waves had a good deal of work to do
yet to clear the ice from the lake. The hardest part was done when the
ice-cake burst into pieces, but all these pieces must be broken and
hurled against each other, to be crushed, worn down, and dissolved.
There was still a great deal of hard and sound ice left, which formed
large, unbroken surfaces.</p>

<p id="id01721">The greatest danger for the children lay in the fact that they had no
general view of the ice. They did not see the places where the gaps were
so wide that they could not possibly jump over them, nor did they know
where to find any floes that would hold them, so they wandered aimlessly
back and forth, going farther out on the lake instead of nearer land. At
last, confused and terrified, they stood still and wept.</p>

<p id="id01722">Then a flock of wild geese in rapid flight came rushing by. They
shrieked loudly and sharply; but the strange thing was that above the
geese-cackle the little children heard these words:</p>

<p id="id01723">"You must go to the right, the right, the right!" They began at once to
follow the advice; but before long they were again standing irresolute,
facing another broad gap.</p>

<p id="id01724">Again they heard the geese shrieking above them, and again, amid the
geese-cackle, they distinguished a few words:</p>

<p id="id01725">"Stand where you are! Stand where you are!"</p>

<p id="id01726">The children did not say a word to each other, but obeyed and stood
still. Soon after that the ice-floes floated together, so that they
could cross the gap. Then they took hold of hands again and ran. They
were afraid not only of the peril, but of the mysterious help that had
come to them.</p>

<p id="id01727">Soon they had to stop again, and immediately the sound of the voice
reached them.</p>

<p id="id01728">"Straight ahead, straight ahead!" it said.</p>

<p id="id01729">This leading continued for about half an hour; by that time they had
reached Ljunger Point, where they left the ice and waded to shore. They
were still terribly frightened, even though they were on firm land. They
did not stop to look back at the lake—where the waves were pitching the
ice-floes faster and faster—but ran on. When they had gone a short
distance along the point, Osa paused suddenly.</p>

<p id="id01730">"Wait here, little Mats," she said; "I have forgotten something."</p>

<p id="id01731">Osa, the goose girl, went down to the strand again, where she stopped to
rummage in her bag. Finally she fished out a little wooden shoe, which
she placed on a stone where it could be plainly seen. Then she ran to
little Mats without once looking back.</p>

<p id="id01732">But the instant her back was turned, a big white goose shot down from
the sky, like a streak of lightning, snatched the wooden shoe, and flew
away with it.</p>

<h4 id="id01733" style="margin-top: 2em">THUMBIETOT AND THE BEARS</h4>

<h4 id="id01734" style="margin-top: 2em">THE IRONWORKS</h4>

<p id="id01735"><i>Thursday, April twenty-eighth</i>.</p>

<p id="id01736">When the wild geese and Thumbietot had helped Osa, the goose girl, and
little Mats across the ice, they flew into Westmanland, where they
alighted in a grain field to feed and rest.</p>

<p id="id01737">A strong west wind blew almost the entire day on which the wild geese
travelled over the mining districts, and as soon as they attempted to
direct their course northward they were buffeted toward the east. Now,
Akka thought that Smirre Fox was at large in the eastern part of the
province; therefore she would not fly in that direction, but turned
back, time and again, struggling westward with great difficulty. At this
rate the wild geese advanced very slowly, and late in the afternoon they
were still in the Westmanland mining districts. Toward evening the wind
abated suddenly, and the tired travellers hoped that they would have an
interval of easy flight before sundown. Then along came a violent gust
of wind, which tossed the geese before it, like balls, and the boy, who
was sitting comfortably, with no thought of peril, was lifted from the
goose's back and hurled into space.</p>

<p id="id01738">Little and light as he was, he could not fall straight to the ground in
such a wind; so at first he was carried along with it, drifting down
slowly and spasmodically, as a leaf falls from a tree.</p>

<p id="id01739">"Why, this isn't so bad!" thought the boy as he fell. "I'm tumbling as
easily as if I were only a scrap of paper. Morten Goosey-Gander will
doubtless hurry along and pick me up."</p>

<p id="id01740">The first thing the boy did when he landed was to tear off his cap and
wave it, so that the big white gander should see where he was.</p>

<p id="id01741">"Here am I, where are you? Here am I, where are you?" he called, and was
rather surprised that Morten Goosey-Gander was not already at his side.</p>

<p id="id01742">But the big white gander was not to be seen, nor was the wild goose
flock outlined against the sky. It had entirely disappeared.</p>

<p id="id01743">He thought this rather singular, but he was neither worried nor
frightened. Not for a second did it occur to him that folk like Akka and
Morten Goosey-Gander would abandon him. The unexpected gust of wind had
probably borne them along with it. As soon as they could manage to turn,
they would surely come back and fetch him.</p>

<p id="id01744">But what was this? Where on earth was he anyway? He had been standing
gazing toward the sky for some sign of the geese, but now he happened to
glance about him. He had not come down on even ground, but had dropped
into a deep, wide mountain cave—or whatever it might be. It was as
large as a church, with almost perpendicular walls on all four sides,
and with no roof at all. On the ground were some huge rocks, between
which moss and lignon-brush and dwarfed birches grew. Here and there in
the wall were projections, from which swung rickety ladders. At one side
there was a dark passage, which apparently led far into the mountain.</p>

<p id="id01745">The boy had not been travelling over the mining districts a whole day
for nothing. He comprehended at once that the big cleft had been made by
the men who had mined ore in this place.</p>

<p id="id01746">"I must try and climb back to earth again," he thought, "otherwise I
fear that my companions won't find me!"</p>

<p id="id01747">He was about to go over to the wall when some one seized him from
behind, and he heard a gruff voice growl in his ear: "Who are you?"</p>

<p id="id01748">The boy turned quickly, and, in the confusion of the moment, he thought
he was facing a huge rock, covered with brownish moss. Then he noticed
that the rock had broad paws to walk with, a head, two eyes, and a
growling mouth.</p>

<p id="id01749">He could not pull himself together to answer, nor did the big beast
appear to expect it of him, for it knocked him down, rolled him back and
forth with its paws, and nosed him. It seemed just about ready to
swallow him, when it changed its mind and called:</p>

<p id="id01750">"Brumme and Mulle, come here, you cubs, and you shall have something
good to eat!"</p>

<p id="id01751">A pair of frowzy cubs, as uncertain on their feet and as woolly as
puppies, came tumbling along.</p>

<p id="id01752">"What have you got, Mamma Bear? May we see, oh, may we see?" shrieked
the cubs excitedly.</p>

<p id="id01753">"Oho! so I've fallen in with bears," thought the boy to himself. "Now<br>

Smirre Fox won't have to trouble himself further to chase after me!"<br>
</p>

<p id="id01754">The mother bear pushed the boy along to the cubs. One of them nabbed him
quickly and ran off with him; but he did not bite hard. He was playful
and wanted to amuse himself awhile with Thumbietot before eating him.
The other cub was after the first one to snatch the boy for himself, and
as he lumbered along he managed to tumble straight down on the head of
the one that carried the boy. So the two cubs rolled over each other,
biting, clawing, and snarling.</p>

<p id="id01755">During the tussle the boy got loose, ran over to the wall, and started
to scale it. Then both cubs scurried after him, and, nimbly scaling the
cliff, they caught up with him and tossed him down on the moss, like a
ball.</p>

<p id="id01756">"Now I know how a poor little mousie fares when it falls into the cat's
claws," thought the boy.</p>

<p id="id01757">He made several attempts to get away. He ran deep down into the old
tunnel and hid behind the rocks and climbed the birches, but the cubs
hunted him out, go where he would. The instant they caught him they let
him go, so that he could run away again and they should have the fun of
recapturing him.</p>

<p id="id01758">At last the boy got so sick and tired of it all that he threw himself
down on the ground.</p>

<p id="id01759">"Run away," growled the cubs, "or we'll eat you up!"</p>

<p id="id01760">"You'll have to eat me then," said the boy, "for I can't run any more."</p>

<p id="id01761">Immediately both cubs rushed over to the mother bear and complained:</p>

<p id="id01762">"Mamma Bear, oh, Mamma Bear, he won't play any more."</p>

<p id="id01763">"Then you must divide him evenly between you," said Mother Bear.</p>

<p id="id01764">When the boy heard this he was so scared that he jumped up instantly and
began playing again.</p>

<p id="id01765">As it was bedtime, Mother Bear called to the cubs that they must come
now and cuddle up to her and go to sleep. They had been having such a
good time that they wished to continue their play next day; so they took
the boy between them and laid their paws over him. They did not want him
to move without waking them. They went to sleep immediately. The boy
thought that after a while he would try to steal away. But never in all
his life had he been so tumbled and tossed and hunted and rolled! And he
was so tired out that he too fell asleep.</p>

<p id="id01766">By and by Father Bear came clambering down the mountain wall. The boy
was wakened by his tearing away stone and gravel as he swung himself
into the old mine. The boy was afraid to move much; but he managed to
stretch himself and turn over, so that he could see the big bear. He was
a frightfully coarse, huge old beast, with great paws, large, glistening
tusks, and wicked little eyes! The boy could not help shuddering as he
looked at this old monarch of the forest.</p>

<p id="id01767">"It smells like a human being around here," said Father Bear the instant
he came up to Mother Bear, and his growl was as the rolling of thunder.</p>

<p id="id01768">"How can you imagine anything so absurd?" said Mother Bear without
disturbing herself. "It has been settled for good and all that we are
not to harm mankind any more; but if one of them were to put in an
appearance here, where the cubs and I have our quarters, there wouldn't
be enough left of him for you to catch even a scent of him!"</p>

<p id="id01769">Father Bear lay down beside Mother Bear. "You ought to know me well
enough to understand that I don't allow anything dangerous to come near
the cubs. Talk, instead, of what you have been doing. I haven't seen you
for a whole week!"</p>

<p id="id01770">"I've been looking about for a new residence," said Father Bear. "First
I went over to Vermland, to learn from our kinsmen at Ekshärad how they
fared in that country; but I had my trouble for nothing. There wasn't a
bear's den left in the whole forest."</p>

<p id="id01771">"I believe the humans want the whole earth to themselves," said Mother
Bear. "Even if we leave people and cattle in peace and live solely upon
lignon and insects and green things, we cannot remain unmolested in the
forest! I wonder where we could move to in order to live in peace?"</p>

<p id="id01772">"We've lived comfortably for many years in this pit," observed Father
Bear. "But I can't be content here now since the big noise-shop has been
built right in our neighbourhood. Lately I have been taking a look at
the land east of Dal River, over by Garpen Mountain. Old mine pits are
plentiful there, too, and other fine retreats. I thought it looked as if
one might be fairly protected against men—"</p>

<p id="id01773">The instant Father Bear said this he sat up and began to sniff.</p>

<p id="id01774">"It's extraordinary that whenever I speak of human beings I catch that
queer scent again," he remarked.</p>

<p id="id01775">"Go and see for yourself if you don't believe me!" challenged Mother
Bear. "I should just like to know where a human being could manage to
hide down here?"</p>

<p id="id01776">The bear walked all around the cave, and nosed. Finally he went back and
lay down without a word.</p>

<p id="id01777">"What did I tell you?" said Mother Bear. "But of course you think that
no one but yourself has any nose or ears!"</p>

<p id="id01778">"One can't be too careful, with such neighbours as we have," said Father
Bear gently. Then he leaped up with a roar. As luck would have it, one
of the cubs had moved a paw over to Nils Holgersson's face and the poor
little wretch could not breathe, but began to sneeze. It was impossible
for Mother Bear to keep Father Bear back any longer. He pushed the young
ones to right and left and caught sight of the boy before he had time to
sit up.</p>

<p id="id01779">He would have swallowed him instantly if Mother Bear had not cast
herself between them.</p>

<p id="id01780">"Don't touch him! He belongs to the cubs," she said. "They have had
such fun with him the whole evening that they couldn't bear to eat him
up, but wanted to save him until morning."</p>

<p id="id01781">Father Bear pushed Mother Bear aside.</p>

<p id="id01782">"Don't meddle with what you don't understand!" he roared. "Can't you
scent that human odour about him from afar? I shall eat him at once, or
he will play us some mean trick."</p>

<p id="id01783">He opened his jaws again; but meanwhile the boy had had time to think,
and, quick as a flash, he dug into his knapsack and brought forth some
matches—his sole weapon of defence—struck one on his leather breeches,
and stuck the burning match into the bear's open mouth.</p>

<p id="id01784">Father Bear snorted when he smelled the sulphur, and with that the flame
went out. The boy was ready with another match, but, curiously enough,
Father Bear did not repeat his attack.</p>

<p id="id01785">"Can you light many of those little blue roses?" asked Father Bear.</p>

<p id="id01786">"I can light enough to put an end to the whole forest," replied the boy,
for he thought that in this way he might be able to scare Father Bear.</p>

<p id="id01787">"Oh, that would be no trick for me!" boasted the boy, hoping that this
would make the bear respect him.</p>

<p id="id01788">"Good!" exclaimed the bear. "You shall render me a service. Now I'm very
glad that I did not eat you!"</p>

<p id="id01789">Father Bear carefully took the boy between his tusks and climbed up from
the pit. He did this with remarkable ease and agility, considering that
he was so big and heavy. As soon as he was up, he speedily made for the
woods. It was evident that Father Bear was created to squeeze through
dense forests. The heavy body pushed through the brushwood as a boat
does through the water.</p>

<p id="id01790">Father Bear ran along till he came to a hill at the skirt of the forest,
where he could see the big noise-shop. Here he lay down and placed the
boy in front of him, holding him securely between his forepaws.</p>

<p id="id01791">"Now look down at that big noise-shop!" he commanded. The great
ironworks, with many tall buildings, stood at the edge of a waterfall.
High chimneys sent forth dark clouds of smoke, blasting furnaces were in
full blaze, and light shone from all the windows and apertures. Within
hammers and rolling mills were going with such force that the air rang
with their clatter and boom. All around the workshops proper were
immense coal sheds, great slag heaps, warehouses, wood piles, and tool
sheds. Just beyond were long rows of workingmen's homes, pretty villas,
schoolhouses, assembly halls, and shops. But there all was quiet and
apparently everybody was asleep. The boy did not glance in that
direction, but gazed intently at the ironworks. The earth around them
was black; the sky above them was like a great fiery dome; the rapids,
white with foam, rushed by; while the buildings themselves were sending
out light and smoke, fire and sparks. It was the grandest sight the boy
had ever seen!</p>

<p id="id01792">"Surely you don't mean to say you can set fire to a place like that?"
remarked the bear doubtingly.</p>

<p id="id01793">The boy stood wedged between the beast's paws thinking the only thing
that might save him would be that the bear should have a high opinion of
his capability and power.</p>

<p id="id01794">"It's all the same to me," he answered with a superior air. "Big or
little, I can burn it down."</p>

<p id="id01795">"Then I'll tell you something," said Father Bear. "My forefathers lived
in this region from the time that the forests first sprang up. From
them I inherited hunting grounds and pastures, lairs and retreats, and
have lived here in peace all my life. In the beginning I wasn't troubled
much by the human kind. They dug in the mountains and picked up a little
ore down here, by the rapids; they had a forge and a furnace, but the
hammers sounded only a few hours during the day, and the furnace was not
fired more than two moons at a stretch. It wasn't so bad but that I
could stand it; but these last years, since they have built this
noise-shop, which keeps up the same racket both day and night, life here
has become intolerable. Formerly only a manager and a couple of
blacksmiths lived here, but now there are so many people that I can
never feel safe from them. I thought that I should have to move away,
but I have discovered something better!"</p>

<p id="id01796">The boy wondered what Father Bear had hit upon, but no opportunity was
afforded him to ask, as the bear took him between his tusks again and
lumbered down the hill. The boy could see nothing, but knew by the
increasing noise that they were approaching the rolling mills.</p>

<p id="id01797">Father Bear was well informed regarding the ironworks. He had prowled
around there on many a dark night, had observed what went on within, and
had wondered if there would never be any cessation of the work. He had
tested the walls with his paws and wished that he were only strong
enough to knock down the whole structure with a single blow.</p>

<p id="id01798">He was not easily distinguishable against the dark ground, and when, in
addition, he remained in the shadow of the walls, there was not much
danger of his being discovered. Now he walked fearlessly between the
workshops and climbed to the top of a slag heap. There he sat up on his
haunches, took the boy between his forepaws and held him up.</p>

<p id="id01799">"Try to look into the house!" he commanded. A strong current of air was
forced into a big cylinder which was suspended from the ceiling and
filled with molten iron. As this current rushed into the mess of iron
with an awful roar, showers of sparks of all colours spurted up in
bunches, in sprays, in long clusters! They struck against the wall and
came splashing down over the whole big room. Father Bear let the boy
watch the gorgeous spectacle until the blowing was over and the flowing
and sparkling red steel had been poured into ingot moulds.</p>

<p id="id01800">The boy was completely charmed by the marvellous display and almost
forgot that he was imprisoned between a bear's two paws.</p>

<p id="id01801">Father Bear let him look into the rolling mill. He saw a workman take a
short, thick bar of iron at white heat from a furnace opening and place
it under a roller. When the iron came out from under the roller, it was
flattened and extended. Immediately another workman seized it and placed
it beneath a heavier roller, which made it still longer and thinner.
Thus it was passed from roller to roller, squeezed and drawn out until,
finally, it curled along the floor, like a long red thread.</p>

<p id="id01802">But while the first bar of iron was being pressed, a second was taken
from the furnace and placed under the rollers, and when this was a
little along, a third was brought. Continuously fresh threads came
crawling over the floor, like hissing snakes. The boy was dazzled by the
iron. But he found it more splendid to watch the workmen who,
dexterously and delicately, seized the glowing snakes with their tongs
and forced them under the rollers. It seemed like play for them to
handle the hissing iron.</p>

<p id="id01803">"I call that real man's work!" the boy remarked to himself.</p>

<p id="id01804">The bear then let the boy have a peep at the furnace and the forge, and
he became more and more astonished as he saw how the blacksmiths handled
iron and fire.</p>

<p id="id01805">"Those men have no fear of heat and flames," he thought. The workmen
were sooty and grimy. He fancied they were some sort of firefolk—that
was why they could bend and mould the iron as they wished. He could not
believe that they were just ordinary men, since they had such power!</p>

<p id="id01806">"They keep this up day after day, night after night," said Father Bear,
as he dropped wearily down on the ground. "You can understand that one
gets rather tired of that kind of thing. I'm mighty glad that at last I
can put an end to it!"</p>

<p id="id01807">"Indeed!" said the boy. "How will you go about it?"</p>

<p id="id01808">"Oh, I thought that you were going to set fire to the buildings!" said
Father Bear. "That would put an end to all this work, and I could remain
in my old home."</p>

<p id="id01809">The boy was all of a shiver.</p>

<p id="id01810">So it was for this that Father Bear had brought him here!</p>

<p id="id01811">"If you will set fire to the noise-works, I'll promise to spare your
life," said Father Bear. "But if you don't do it, I'll make short work
of you!" The huge workshops were built of brick, and the boy was
thinking to himself that Father Bear could command as much as he liked,
it was impossible to obey him. Presently he saw that it might not be
impossible after all. Just beyond them lay a pile of chips and shavings
to which he could easily set fire, and beside it was a wood pile that
almost reached the coal shed. The coal shed extended over to the
workshops, and if that once caught fire, the flames would soon fly over
to the roof of the iron foundry. Everything combustible would burn, the
walls would fall from the heat, and the machinery would be destroyed.
"Will you or won't you?" demanded Father Bear. The boy knew that he
ought to answer promptly that he would not, but he also knew that then
the bear's paws would squeeze him to death; therefore he replied:</p>

<p id="id01812">"I shall have to think it over."</p>

<p id="id01813">"Very well, do so," assented Father Bear. "Let me say to you that iron
is the thing that has given men the advantage over us bears, which is
another reason for my wishing to put an end to the work here."</p>

<p id="id01814">The boy thought he would use the delay to figure out some plan of
escape, but he was so worried he could not direct his thoughts where he
would; instead he began to think of the great help that iron had been to
mankind. They needed iron for everything. There was iron in the plough
that broke up the field, in the axe that felled the tree for building
houses, in the scythe that mowed the grain, and in the knife, which
could be turned to all sorts of uses. There was iron in the horse's bit,
in the lock on the door, in the nails that held furniture together, in
the sheathing that covered the roof. The rifle which drove away wild
beasts was made of iron, also the pick that had broken up the mine. Iron
covered the men-of-war he had seen at Karlskrona; the locomotives
steamed through the country on iron rails; the needle that had stitched
his coat was of iron; the shears that clipped the sheep and the kettle
that cooked the food. Big and little alike—much that was indispensable
was made from iron. Father Bear was perfectly right in saying that it
was the iron that had given men their mastery over the bears.</p>

<p id="id01815">"Now will you or won't you?" Father Bear repeated.</p>

<p id="id01816">The boy was startled from his musing. Here he stood thinking of matters
that were entirely unnecessary, and had not yet found a way to save
himself!</p>

<p id="id01817">"You mustn't be so impatient," he said. "This is a serious matter for
me, and I've got to have time to consider."</p>

<p id="id01818">"Well, then, consider another moment," said Father Bear. "But let me
tell you that it's because of the iron that men have become so much
wiser than we bears. For this alone, if for nothing else, I should like
to put a stop to the work here."</p>

<p id="id01819">Again the boy endeavoured to think out a plan of escape, but his
thoughts wandered, willy nilly. They were taken up with the iron. And
gradually he began to comprehend how much thinking and calculating men
must have done before they discovered how to produce iron from ore, and
he seemed to see sooty blacksmiths of old bending over the forge,
pondering how they should properly handle it. Perhaps it was because
they had thought so much about the iron that intelligence had been
developed in mankind, until finally they became so advanced that they
were able to build great works like these. The fact was that men owed
more to the iron than they themselves knew.</p>

<p id="id01820">"Well, what say you? Will you or won't you?" insisted Father Bear.</p>

<p id="id01821">The boy shrank back. Here he stood thinking needless thoughts, and had
no idea as to what he should do to save himself.</p>

<p id="id01822">"It's not such an easy matter to decide as you think," he answered. "You
must give me time for reflection."</p>

<p id="id01823">"I can wait for you a little longer," said Father Bear. "But after that
you'll get no more grace. You must know that it's the fault of the iron
that the human kind can live here on the property of the bears. And now
you understand why I would be rid of the work."</p>

<p id="id01824">The boy meant to use the last moment to think out some way to save
himself, but, anxious and distraught as he was, his thoughts wandered
again. Now he began thinking of all that he had seen when he flew over
the mining districts. It was strange that there should be so much life
and activity and so much work back there in the wilderness.</p>

<p id="id01825">"Just think how poor and desolate this place would be had there been no
iron here!</p>

<p id="id01826">"This very foundry gave employment to many, and had gathered around it
many homes filled with people, who, in turn, had attracted hither
railways and telegraph wires and—"</p>

<p id="id01827">"Come, come!" growled the bear. "Will you or won't you?"</p>

<p id="id01828">The boy swept his hand across his forehead. No plan of escape had as yet
come to his mind, but this much he knew—he did not wish to do any harm
to the iron, which was so useful to rich and poor alike, and which gave
bread to so many people in this land.</p>

<p id="id01829">"I won't!" he said.</p>

<p id="id01830">Father Bear squeezed him a little harder, but said nothing.</p>

<p id="id01831">"You'll not get me to destroy the ironworks!" defied the boy. "The iron
is so great a blessing that it will never do to harm it."</p>

<p id="id01832">"Then of course you don't expect to be allowed to live very long?" said
the bear.</p>

<p id="id01833">"No, I don't expect it," returned the boy, looking the bear straight in
the eye.</p>

<p id="id01834">Father Bear gripped him still harder. It hurt so that the boy could not
keep the tears back, but he did not cry out or say a word.</p>

<p id="id01835">"Very well, then," said Father Bear, raising his paw very slowly, hoping
that the boy would give in at the last moment.</p>

<p id="id01836">But just then the boy heard something click very close to them, and saw
the muzzle of a rifle two paces away. Both he and Father Bear had been
so engrossed in their own affairs they had not observed that a man had
stolen right upon them.</p>

<p id="id01837">"Father Bear! Don't you hear the clicking of a trigger?" cried the boy.<br>

"Run, or you'll be shot!"<br>
</p>

<p id="id01838">Father Bear grew terribly hurried. However, he allowed himself time
enough to pick up the boy and carry him along. As he ran, a couple of
shots sounded, and the bullets grazed his ears, but, luckily, he
escaped.</p>

<p id="id01839">The boy thought, as he was dangling from the bear's mouth, that never
had he been so stupid as he was to-night. If he had only kept still, the
bear would have been shot, and he himself would have been freed. But he
had become so accustomed to helping the animals that he did it
naturally, and as a matter of course.</p>

<p id="id01840">When Father Bear had run some distance into the woods, he paused and set
the boy down on the ground.</p>

<p id="id01841">"Thank you, little one!" he said. "I dare say those bullets would have
caught me if you hadn't been there. And now I want to do you a service
in return. If you should ever meet with another bear, just say to him
this—which I shall whisper to you—and he won't touch you."</p>

<p id="id01842">Father Bear whispered a word or two into the boy's ear and hurried away,
for he thought he heard hounds and hunters pursuing him.</p>

<p id="id01843">The boy stood in the forest, free and unharmed, and could hardly
understand how it was possible.</p>

<p id="id01844">The wild geese had been flying back and forth the whole evening, peering
and calling, but they had been unable to find Thumbietot. They searched
long after the sun had set, and, finally, when it had grown so dark that
they were forced to alight somewhere for the night, they were very
downhearted. There was not one among them but thought the boy had been
killed by the fall and was lying dead in the forest, where they could
not see him.</p>

<p id="id01845">But the next morning, when the sun peeped over the hills and awakened
the wild geese, the boy lay sleeping, as usual, in their midst. When he
woke and heard them shrieking and cackling their astonishment, he could
not help laughing.</p>

<p id="id01846">They were so eager to know what had happened to him that they did not
care to go to breakfast until he had told them the whole story. The boy
soon narrated his entire adventure with the bears, but after that he
seemed reluctant to continue.</p>

<p id="id01847">"How I got back to you perhaps you already know?" he said.</p>

<p id="id01848">"No, we know nothing. We thought you were killed."</p>

<p id="id01849">"That's curious!" remarked the boy. "Oh, yes!—when Father Bear left me
I climbed up into a pine and fell asleep. At daybreak I was awakened by
an eagle hovering over me. He picked me up with his talons and carried
me away. He didn't hurt me, but flew straight here to you and dropped me
down among you."</p>

<p id="id01850">"Didn't he tell you who he was?" asked the big white gander.</p>

<p id="id01851">"He was gone before I had time even to thank him. I thought that Mother<br>

Akka had sent him after me."<br>
</p>

<p id="id01852">"How extraordinary!" exclaimed the white goosey-gander. "But are you
certain that it was an eagle?"</p>

<p id="id01853">"I had never before seen an eagle," said the boy, "but he was so big
and splendid that I can't give him a lowlier name!"</p>

<p id="id01854">Morten Goosey-Gander turned to the wild geese to hear what they thought
of this; but they stood gazing into the air, as though they were
thinking of something else.</p>

<p id="id01855">"We must not forget entirely to eat breakfast today," said Akka, quickly
spreading her wings.</p>

<h4 id="id01856" style="margin-top: 2em">THE FLOOD</h4>

<h4 id="id01857" style="margin-top: 2em">THE SWANS</h4>

<p id="id01858"><i>May first to fourth</i>.</p>

<p id="id01859">There was a terrible storm raging in the district north of Lake Mälar,
which lasted several days. The sky was a dull gray, the wind whistled,
and the rain beat. Both people and animals knew the spring could not be
ushered in with anything short of this; nevertheless they thought it
unbearable.</p>

<p id="id01860">After it had been raining for a whole day, the snowdrifts in the pine
forests began to melt in earnest, and the spring brooks grew lively. All
the pools on the farms, the standing water in the ditches, the water
that oozed between the tufts in marshes and swamps—all were in motion
and tried to find their way to creeks, that they might be borne along to
the sea.</p>

<p id="id01861">The creeks rushed as fast as possible down to the rivers, and the rivers
did their utmost to carry the water to Lake Mälar.</p>

<p id="id01862">All the lakes and rivers in Uppland and the mining district quickly
threw off their ice covers on one and the same day, so that the creeks
filled with ice-floes which rose clear up to their banks.</p>

<p id="id01863">Swollen as they were, they emptied into Lake Mälar, and it was not long
before the lake had taken in as much water as it could well hold. Down
by the outlet was a raging torrent. Norrström is a narrow channel, and
it could not let out the water quickly enough. Besides, there was a
strong easterly wind that lashed against the land, obstructing the
stream when it tried to carry the fresh water into the East Sea. Since
the rivers kept running to Mälaren with more water than it could dispose
of, there was nothing for the big lake to do but overflow its banks.</p>

<p id="id01864">It rose very slowly, as if reluctant to injure its beautiful shores; but
as they were mostly low and gradually sloping, it was not long before
the water had flooded several acres of land, and that was enough to
create the greatest alarm.</p>

<p id="id01865">Lake Mälar is unique in its way, being made up of a succession of narrow
fiords, bays, and inlets. In no place does it spread into a storm
centre, but seems to have been created only for pleasure trips, yachting
tours, and fishing. Nowhere does it present barren, desolate, wind-swept
shores. It looks as if it never thought that its shores could hold
anything but country seats, summer villas, manors, and amusement
resorts. But, because it usually presents a very agreeable and friendly
appearance, there is all the more havoc whenever it happens to drop its
smiling expression in the spring, and show that it can be serious.</p>

<p id="id01866">At that critical time Smirre Fox happened to come sneaking through a
birch grove just north of Lake Mälar. As usual, he was thinking of
Thumbietot and the wild geese, and wondering how he should ever find
them again. He had lost all track of them.</p>

<p id="id01867">As he stole cautiously along, more discouraged than usual, he caught
sight of Agar, the carrier-pigeon, who had perched herself on a birch
branch.</p>

<p id="id01868">"My, but I'm in luck to run across you, Agar!" exclaimed Smirre. "Maybe
you can tell me where Akka from Kebnekaise and her flock hold forth
nowadays?"</p>

<p id="id01869">"It's quite possible that I know where they are," Agar hinted, "but I'm
not likely to tell you!"</p>

<p id="id01870">"Please yourself!" retorted Smirre. "Nevertheless, you can take a
message that I have for them. You probably know the present condition of
Lake Mälar? There's a great overflow down there and all the swans who
live in Hjälsta Bay are about to see their nests, with all their eggs,
destroyed. Daylight, the swan-king, has heard of the midget who travels
with the wild geese and knows a remedy for every ill. He has sent me to
ask Akka if she will bring Thumbietot down to Hjälsta Bay."</p>

<p id="id01871">"I dare say I can convey your message," Agar replied, "but I can't
understand how the little boy will be able to help the swans."</p>

<p id="id01872">"Nor do I," said Smirre, "but he can do almost everything, it seems."</p>

<p id="id01873">"It's surprising to me that Daylight should send his messages by a fox,"<br>

Agar remarked.<br>
</p>

<p id="id01874">"Well, we're not exactly what you'd call good friends," said Smirre
smoothly, "but in an emergency like this we must help each other.
Perhaps it would be just as well not to tell Akka that you got the
message from a fox. Between you and me, she's inclined to be a little
suspicious."</p>

<p id="id01875">The safest refuge for water-fowl in the whole Mälar district is Hjälsta<br>

Bay. It has low shores, shallow water and is also covered with reeds.<br>
</p>

<p id="id01876">It is by no means as large as Lake Tåkern, but nevertheless Hjälsta is a
good retreat for birds, since it has long been forbidden territory to
hunters.</p>

<p id="id01877">It is the home of a great many swans, and the owner of the old castle
nearby has prohibited all shooting on the bay, so that they might be
unmolested.</p>

<p id="id01878">As soon as Akka received word that the swans needed her help, she
hastened down to Hjälsta Bay. She arrived with her flock one evening and
saw at a glance that there had been a great disaster. The big swans'
nests had been torn away, and the strong wind was driving them down the
bay. Some had already fallen apart, two or three had capsized, and the
eggs lay at the bottom of the lake.</p>

<p id="id01879">When Akka alighted on the bay, all the swans living there were gathered
near the eastern shore, where they were protected from the wind.</p>

<p id="id01880">Although they had suffered much by the flood, they were too proud to let
any one see it.</p>

<p id="id01881">"It is useless to cry," they said. "There are plenty of root-fibres and
stems here; we can soon build new nests."</p>

<p id="id01882">None had thought of asking a stranger to help them, and the swans had no
idea that Smirre Fox had sent for the wild geese!</p>

<p id="id01883">There were several hundred swans resting on the water. They had placed
themselves according to rank and station. The young and inexperienced
were farthest out, the old and wise nearer the middle of the group, and
right in the centre sat Daylight, the swan-king, and Snow-White, the
swan-queen, who were older than any of the others and regarded the rest
of the swans as their children.</p>

<p id="id01884">The geese alighted on the west shore of the bay; but when Akka saw where
the swans were, she swam toward them at once. She was very much
surprised at their having sent for her, but she regarded it as an honour
and did not wish to lose a moment in coming to their aid.</p>

<p id="id01885">As Akka approached the swans she paused to see if the geese who followed
her swam in a straight line, and at even distances apart.</p>

<p id="id01886">"Now, swim along quickly!" she ordered. "Don't stare at the swans as if
you had never before seen anything beautiful, and don't mind what they
may say to you!"</p>

<p id="id01887">This was not the first time that Akka had called on the aristocratic
swans. They had always received her in a manner befitting a great
traveller like herself.</p>

<p id="id01888">But still she did not like the idea of swimming in among them. She never
felt so gray and insignificant as when she happened upon swans. One or
another of them was sure to drop a remark about "common gray-feathers"
and "poor folk." But it is always best to take no notice of such things.</p>

<p id="id01889">This time everything passed off uncommonly well. The swans politely made
way for the wild geese, who swam forward through a kind of passageway,
which formed an avenue bordered by shimmering, white birds.</p>

<p id="id01890">It was a beautiful sight to watch them as they spread their wings, like
sails, to appear well before the strangers. They refrained from making
comments, which rather surprised Akka.</p>

<p id="id01891">Evidently Daylight had noted their misbehaviour in the past and had told
the swans that they must conduct themselves in a proper manner—so
thought the leader-goose.</p>

<p id="id01892">But just as the swans were making an effort to observe the rules of
etiquette, they caught sight of the goosey-gander, who swam last in the
long goose-line. Then there was a murmur of disapproval, even of
threats, among the swans, and at once there was an end to their good
deportment!</p>

<p id="id01893">"What's this?" shrieked one. "Do the wild geese intend to dress up in
white feathers?"</p>

<p id="id01894">"They needn't think that will make swans of them," cried another.</p>

<p id="id01895">They began shrieking—one louder than another—in their strong, resonant
voices. It was impossible to explain that a tame goosey-gander had come
with the wild geese.</p>

<p id="id01896">"That must be the goose-king himself coming along," they said
tauntingly. "There's no limit to their audacity!"</p>

<p id="id01897">"That's no goose, it's only a tame duck."</p>

<p id="id01898">The big white gander remembered Akka's admonition to pay no attention,
no matter what he might hear. He kept quiet and swam ahead as fast he
could, but it did no good. The swans became more and more impertinent.</p>

<p id="id01899">"What kind of a frog does he carry on his back?" asked one. "They must
think we don't see it's a frog because it is dressed like a human
being."</p>

<p id="id01900">The swans, who but a moment before had been resting in such perfect
order, now swam up and down excitedly. All tried to crowd forward to get
a glimpse of the white wild goose.</p>

<p id="id01901">"That white goosey-gander ought to be ashamed to come here and parade
before swans!"</p>

<p id="id01902">"He's probably as gray as the rest of them. He has only been in a flour
barrel at some farm house!"</p>

<p id="id01903">Akka had just come up to Daylight and was about to ask him what kind of
help he wanted of her, when the swan-king noticed the uproar among the
swans.</p>

<p id="id01904">"What do I see? Haven't I taught you to be polite to strangers?" he said
with a frown.</p>

<p id="id01905">Snow-White, the swan-queen, swam out to restore order among her
subjects, and again Daylight turned to Akka.</p>

<p id="id01906">Presently Snow-White came back, appearing greatly agitated.</p>

<p id="id01907">"Can't you keep them quiet?" shouted Daylight.</p>

<p id="id01908">"There's a white wild goose over there," answered Snow-White. "Is it not
shameful? I don't wonder they are furious!"</p>

<p id="id01909">"A white wild goose?" scoffed Daylight. "That's too ridiculous! There
can't be such a thing. You must be mistaken."</p>

<p id="id01910">The crowds around Morten Goosey-Gander grew larger and larger. Akka and
the other wild geese tried to swim over to him, but were jostled hither
and thither and could not get to him.</p>

<p id="id01911">The old swan-king, who was the strongest among them, swam off quickly,
pushed all the others aside, and made his way over to the big white
gander. But when he saw that there really was a white goose on the
water, he was just as indignant as the rest.</p>

<p id="id01912">He hissed with rage, flew straight at Morten Goosey-Gander and tore out
a few feathers.</p>

<p id="id01913">"I'll teach you a lesson, wild goose," he shrieked, "so that you'll not
come again to the swans, togged out in this way!"</p>

<p id="id01914">"Fly, Morten Goosey-Gander! Fly, fly!" cried Akka, for she knew that
otherwise the swans would pull out every feather the goosey-gander had.</p>

<p id="id01915">"Fly, fly!" screamed Thumbietot, too.</p>

<p id="id01916">But the goosey-gander was so hedged in by the swans that he had not
room enough to spread his wings. All around him the swans stretched
their long necks, opened their strong bills, and plucked his feathers.</p>

<p id="id01917">Morten Goosey-Gander defended himself as best he could, by striking and
biting. The wild geese also began to fight the swans.</p>

<p id="id01918">It was obvious how this would have ended had the geese not received help
quite unexpectedly.</p>

<p id="id01919">A red-tail noticed that they were being roughly treated by the swans.
Instantly he cried out the shrill call that little birds use when they
need help to drive off a hawk or a falcon.</p>

<p id="id01920">Three calls had barely sounded when all the little birds in the vicinity
came shooting down to Hjälsta Bay, as if on wings of lightning.</p>

<p id="id01921">These delicate little creatures swooped down upon the swans, screeched
in their ears, and obstructed their view with the flutter of their tiny
wings. They made them dizzy with their fluttering and drove them to
distraction with their cries of "Shame, shame, swans!"</p>

<p id="id01922">The attack of the small birds lasted but a moment. When they were gone
and the swans came to their senses, they saw that the geese had risen
and flown over to the other end of the bay.</p>

<h5 id="id01923">THE NEW WATCH-DOG</h5>

<p id="id01924">There was this at least to be said in the swans' favour—when they saw
that the wild geese had escaped, they were too proud to chase them.
Moreover, the geese could stand on a clump of reeds with perfect
composure, and sleep.</p>

<p id="id01925">Nils Holgersson was too hungry to sleep.</p>

<p id="id01926">"It is necessary for me to get something to eat," he said.</p>

<p id="id01927">At that time, when all kinds of things were floating on the water, it
was not difficult for a little boy like Nils Holgersson to find a craft.
He did not stop to deliberate, but hopped down on a stump that had
drifted in amongst the reeds. Then he picked up a little stick and began
to pole toward shore.</p>

<p id="id01928">Just as he was landing, he heard a splash in the water. He stopped
short. First he saw a lady swan asleep in her big nest quite close to
him, then he noticed that a fox had taken a few steps into the water and
was sneaking up to the swan's nest.</p>

<p id="id01929">"Hi, hi, hi! Get up, get up!" cried the boy, beating the water with his
stick.</p>

<p id="id01930">The lady swan rose, but not so quickly but that the fox could have
pounced upon her had he cared to. However, he refrained and instead
hurried straight toward the boy.</p>

<p id="id01931">Thumbietot saw the fox coming and ran for his life.</p>

<p id="id01932">Wide stretches of meadow land spread before him. He saw no tree that he
could climb, no hole where he might hide; he just had to keep running.</p>

<p id="id01933">The boy was a good runner, but it stands to reason that he could not
race with a fox!</p>

<p id="id01934">Not far from the bay there were a number of little cabins, with candle
lights shining through the windows. Naturally the boy ran in that
direction, but he realized that long before he could reach the nearest
cabin the fox would catch up to him.</p>

<p id="id01935">Once the fox was so close that it looked as if the boy would surely be
his prey, but Nils quickly sprang aside and turned back toward the bay.
By that move the fox lost time, and before he could reach the boy the
latter had run up to two men who were on their way home from work.</p>

<p id="id01936">The men were tired and sleepy; they had noticed neither boy nor fox,
although both had been running right in front of them. Nor did the boy
ask help of the men; he was content to walk close beside them.</p>

<p id="id01937">"Surely the fox won't venture to come up to the men," he thought.</p>

<p id="id01938">But presently the fox came pattering along. He probably counted on the
men taking him for a dog, for he went straight up to them.</p>

<p id="id01939">"Whose dog can that be sneaking around here?" queried one. "He looks as
though he were ready to bite."</p>

<p id="id01940">The other paused and glanced back.</p>

<p id="id01941">"Go along with you!" he said, and gave the fox a kick that sent it to
the opposite side of the road. "What are you doing here?"</p>

<p id="id01942">After that the fox kept at a safe distance, but followed all the while.</p>

<p id="id01943">Presently the men reached a cabin and entered it. The boy intended to go
in with them; but when he got to the stoop he saw a big, shaggy
watch-dog rush out from his kennel to greet his master. Suddenly the boy
changed his mind and remained out in the open.</p>

<p id="id01944">"Listen, watch-dog!" whispered the boy as soon as the men had shut the
door. "I wonder if you would like to help me catch a fox to-night?"</p>

<p id="id01945">The dog had poor eyesight and had become irritable and cranky from being
chained.</p>

<p id="id01946">"What, I catch a fox?" he barked angrily. "Who are you that makes fun of
me? You just come within my reach and I'll teach you not to fool with
me!"</p>

<p id="id01947">"You needn't think that I'm afraid to come near you!" said the boy,
running up to the dog.</p>

<p id="id01948">When the dog saw him he was so astonished that he could not speak.</p>

<p id="id01949">"I'm the one they call Thumbietot, who travels with the wild geese,"
said the boy, introducing himself. "Haven't you heard of me?"</p>

<p id="id01950">"I believe the sparrows have twittered a little about you," the dog
returned. "They say that you have done wonderful things for one of your
size."</p>

<p id="id01951">"I've been rather lucky up to the present," admitted the boy. "But now
it's all up with me unless you help me! There's a fox at my heels. He's
lying in wait for me around the corner."</p>

<p id="id01952">"Don't you suppose I can smell him?" retorted the dog. "But we'll soon
be rid of him!" With that the dog sprang as far as the chain would
allow, barking and growling for ever so long. "Now I don't think he will
show his face again to-night!" said the dog.</p>

<p id="id01953">"It will take something besides a fine bark to scare that fox!" the boy
remarked. "He'll soon be here again, and that is precisely what I wish,
for I have set my heart on your catching him."</p>

<p id="id01954">"Are you poking fun at me now?" asked the dog.</p>

<p id="id01955">"Only come with me into your kennel, and I'll tell you what to do."</p>

<p id="id01956">The boy and the watch-dog crept into the kennel and crouched there,
whispering.</p>

<p id="id01957">By and by the fox stuck his nose out from his hiding place. When all was
quiet he crept along cautiously. He scented the boy all the way to the
kennel, but halted at a safe distance and sat down to think of some way
to coax him out.</p>

<p id="id01958">Suddenly the watch-dog poked his head out and growled at him:</p>

<p id="id01959">"Go away, or I'll catch you!"</p>

<p id="id01960">"I'll sit here as long as I please for all of you!" defied the fox.</p>

<p id="id01961">"Go away!" repeated the dog threateningly, "or there will be no more
hunting for you after to-night."</p>

<p id="id01962">But the fox only grinned and did not move an inch.</p>

<p id="id01963">"I know how far your chain can reach," he said.</p>

<p id="id01964">"I have warned you twice," said the dog, coming out from his kennel.<br>

"Now blame yourself!"<br>
</p>

<p id="id01965">With that the dog sprang at the fox and caught him without the least
effort, for he was loose. The boy had unbuckled his collar.</p>

<p id="id01966">There was a hot struggle, but it was soon over. The dog was the victor.<br>

The fox lay on the ground and dared not move.<br>
</p>

<p id="id01967">"Don't stir or I'll kill you!" snarled the dog. Then he took the fox by
the scruff of the neck and dragged him to the kennel. There the boy was
ready with the chain. He placed the dog collar around the neck of the
fox, tightening it so that he was securely chained. During all this the
fox had to lie still, for he was afraid to move.</p>

<p id="id01968">"Now, Smirre Fox, I hope you'll make a good watch-dog," laughed the boy
when he had finished.</p>

<h4 id="id01969" style="margin-top: 2em">DUNFIN</h4>

<h4 id="id01970" style="margin-top: 2em">THE CITY THAT FLOATS ON THE WATER</h4>

<p id="id01971"><i>Friday, May sixth</i>.</p>

<p id="id01972">No one could be more gentle and kind than the little gray goose Dunfin.
All the wild geese loved her, and the tame white goosey-gander would
have died for her. When Dunfin asked for anything not even Akka could
say no.</p>

<p id="id01973">As soon as Dunfin came to Lake Mälar the landscape looked familiar to
her. Just beyond the lake lay the sea, with many wooded islands, and
there, on a little islet, lived her parents and her brothers and
sisters. She begged the wild geese to fly to her home before travelling
farther north, that she might let her family see that she was still
alive. It would be such a joy to them.</p>

<p id="id01974">Akka frankly declared that she thought Dunfin's parents and brothers and
sisters had shown no great love for her when they abandoned her at
Öland, but Dunfin would not admit that Akka was in the right. "What else
was there to do, when they saw that I could not fly?" she protested.
"Surely they couldn't remain at Öland on my account!"</p>

<p id="id01975">Dunfin began telling the wild geese all about her home in the
archipelago, to try to induce them to make the trip. Her family lived on
a rock island. Seen from a distance, there appeared to be nothing but
stone there; but when one came closer, there were to be found the
choicest goose tidbits in clefts and hollows, and one might search long
for better nesting places than those that were hidden in the mountain
crevices or among the osier bushes. But the best of all was the old
fisherman who lived there. Dunfin had heard that in his youth he had
been a great shot and had always lain in the offing and hunted birds.
But now, in his old age—since his wife had died and the children had
gone from home, so that he was alone in the hut—he had begun to care
for the birds on his island. He never fired a shot at them, nor would he
permit others to do so. He walked around amongst the birds' nests, and
when the mother birds were sitting he brought them food. Not one was
afraid of him. They all loved him.</p>

<p id="id01976">Dunfin had been in his hut many times, and he had fed her with bread
crumbs. Because he was kind to the birds, they flocked to his island in
such great numbers that it was becoming overcrowded. If one happened to
arrive a little late in the spring, all the nesting places were
occupied. That was why Dunfin's family had been obliged to leave her.</p>

<p id="id01977">Dunfin begged so hard that she finally had her way, although the wild
geese felt that they were losing time and really should be going
straight north. But a little trip like this to the cliff island would
not delay them more than a day.</p>

<p id="id01978">So they started off one morning, after fortifying themselves with a good
breakfast, and flew eastward over Lake Mälar. The boy did not know for
certain where they were going; but he noticed that the farther east they
flew, the livelier it was on the lake and the more built up were the
shores.</p>

<p id="id01979">Heavily freighted barges and sloops, boats and fishing smacks were on
their way east, and these were met and passed by many pretty white
steamers. Along the shores ran country roads and railway tracks—all in
the same direction. There was some place beyond in the east where all
wished to go to in the morning.</p>

<p id="id01980">On one of the islands the boy saw a big, white castle, and to the east
of it the shores were dotted with villas. At the start these lay far
apart, then they became closer and closer, and, presently, the whole
shore was lined with them. They were of every variety—here a castle,
there a cottage; then a low manor house appeared, or a mansion, with
many small towers. Some stood in gardens, but most of them were in the
wild woods which bordered the shores. Despite their dissimilarity, they
had one point of resemblance—they were not plain and sombre-looking,
like other buildings, but were gaudily painted in striking greens and
blues, reds and white, like children's playhouses.</p>

<p id="id01981">As the boy sat on the goose's back and glanced down at the curious shore
mansions, Dunfin cried out with delight: "Now I know where I am! Over
there lies the City that Floats on the Water."</p>

<p id="id01982">The boy looked ahead. At first he saw nothing but some light clouds and
mists rolling forward over the water, but soon he caught sight of some
tall spires, and then one and another house with many rows of windows.
They appeared and disappeared—rolling hither and thither—but not a
strip of shore did he see! Everything over there appeared to be resting
on the water.</p>

<p id="id01983">Nearer to the city he saw no more pretty playhouses along the
shores—only dingy factories. Great heaps of coal and wood were stacked
behind tall planks, and alongside black, sooty docks lay bulky freight
steamers; but over all was spread a shimmering, transparent mist, which
made everything appear so big and strong and wonderful that it was
almost beautiful.</p>

<p id="id01984">The wild geese flew past factories and freight steamers and were
nearing the cloud-enveloped spires. Suddenly all the mists sank to the
water, save the thin, fleecy ones that circled above their heads,
beautifully tinted in blues and pinks. The other clouds rolled over
water and land. They entirely obscured the lower portions of the houses:
only the upper stories and the roofs and gables were visible. Some of
the buildings appeared to be as high as the Tower of Babel. The boy no
doubt knew that they were built upon hills and mountains, but these he
did not see—only the houses that seemed to float among the white,
drifting clouds. In reality the buildings were dark and dingy, for the
sun in the east was not shining on them.</p>

<p id="id01985">The boy knew that he was riding above a large city, for he saw spires
and house roofs rising from the clouds in every direction. Sometimes an
opening was made in the circling mists, and he looked down into a
running, tortuous stream; but no land could he see. All this was
beautiful to look upon, but he felt quite distraught—as one does when
happening upon something one cannot understand.</p>

<p id="id01986">When he had gone beyond the city, he found that the ground was no longer
hidden by clouds, but that shores, streams, and islands were again
plainly visible. He turned to see the city better, but could not, for
now it looked quite enchanted. The mists had taken on colour from the
sunshine and were rolling forward in the most brilliant reds, blues, and
yellows. The houses were white, as if built of light, and the windows
and spires sparkled like fire. All things floated on the water as
before.</p>

<p id="id01987">The geese were travelling straight east. They flew over factories and
workshops; then over mansions edging the shores. Steamboats and tugs
swarmed on the water; but now they came from the east and were steaming
westward toward the city.</p>

<p id="id01988">The wild geese flew on, but instead of the narrow Mälar fiords and the
little islands, broader waters and larger islands spread under them. At
last the land was left behind and seen no more.</p>

<p id="id01989">They flew still farther out, where they found no more large inhabited
islands—only numberless little rock islands were scattered on the
water. Now the fiords were not crowded by the land. The sea lay before
them, vast and limitless.</p>

<p id="id01990">Here the wild geese alighted on a cliff island, and as soon as their
feet touched the ground the boy turned to Dunfin.</p>

<p id="id01991">"What city did we fly over just now?" he asked.</p>

<p id="id01992">"I don't know what human beings have named it," said Dunfin. "We gray
geese call it the 'City that Floats on the Water'."</p>

<h5 id="id01993">THE SISTERS</h5>

<p id="id01994">Dunfin had two sisters, Prettywing and Goldeye. They were strong and
intelligent birds, but they did not have such a soft and shiny feather
dress as Dunfin, nor did they have her sweet and gentle disposition.
From the time they had been little, yellow goslings, their parents and
relatives and even the old fisherman had plainly shown them that they
thought more of Dunfin than of them. Therefore the sisters had always
hated her.</p>

<p id="id01995">When the wild geese landed on the cliff island, Prettywing and Goldeye
were feeding on a bit of grass close to the strand, and immediately
caught sight of the strangers.</p>

<p id="id01996">"See, Sister Goldeye, what fine-looking geese have come to our island!"
exclaimed Prettywing, "I have rarely seen such graceful birds. Do you
notice that they have a white goosey-gander among them? Did you ever set
eyes on a handsomer bird? One could almost take him for a swan!"</p>

<p id="id01997">Goldeye agreed with her sister that these were certainly very
distinguished strangers that had come to the island, but suddenly she
broke off and called: "Sister Prettywing! Oh, Sister Prettywing! Don't
you see whom they bring with them?"</p>

<p id="id01998">Prettywing also caught sight of Dunfin and was so astounded that she
stood for a long time with her bill wide open, and only hissed.</p>

<p id="id01999">"It can't be possible that it is she! How did she manage to get in with
people of that class? Why, we left her at Öland to freeze and starve."</p>

<p id="id02000">"The worse of it is she will tattle to father and mother that we flew
so close to her that we knocked her wing out of joint," said Goldeye.
"You'll see that it will end in our being driven from the island!"</p>

<p id="id02001">"We have nothing but trouble in store for us, now that that young one
has come back!" snapped Prettywing. "Still I think it would be best for
us to appear as pleased as possible over her return. She is so stupid
that perhaps she didn't even notice that we gave her a push on purpose."</p>

<p id="id02002">While Prettywing and Goldeye were talking in this strain, the wild geese
had been standing on the strand, pluming their feathers after the
flight. Now they marched in a long line up the rocky shore to the cleft
where Dunfin's parents usually stopped.</p>

<p id="id02003">Dunfin's parents were good folk. They had lived on the island longer
than any one else, and it was their habit to counsel and aid all
newcomers. They too had seen the geese approach, but they had not
recognized Dunfin in the flock.</p>

<p id="id02004">"It is strange to see wild geese land on this island," remarked the
goose-master. "It is a fine flock—that one can see by their flight."</p>

<p id="id02005">"But it won't be easy to find pasturage for so many," said the
goose-wife, who was gentle and sweet-tempered, like Dunfin.</p>

<p id="id02006">When Akka came marching with her company, Dunfin's parents went out to
meet her and welcome her to the island. Dunfin flew from her place at
the end of the line and lit between her parents.</p>

<p id="id02007">"Mother and father, I'm here at last!" she cried joyously. "Don't you
know Dunfin?"</p>

<p id="id02008">At first the old goose-parents could not quite make out what they saw,
but when they recognized Dunfin they were absurdly happy, of course.</p>

<p id="id02009">While the wild geese and Morten Goosey-Gander and Dunfin were chattering
excitedly, trying to tell how she had been rescued, Prettywing and
Goldeye came running. They cried "<i>welcome"</i> and pretended to be so
happy because Dunfin was at home that she was deeply moved.</p>

<p id="id02010">The wild geese fared well on the island and decided not to travel
farther until the following morning. After a while the sisters asked
Dunfin if she would come with them and see the places where they
intended to build their nests. She promptly accompanied them, and saw
that they had picked out secluded and well protected nesting places.</p>

<p id="id02011">"Now where will you settle down, Dunfin?" they asked.</p>

<p id="id02012">"I? Why I don't intend to remain on the island," she said. "I'm going
with the wild geese up to Lapland."</p>

<p id="id02013">"What a pity that you must leave us!" said the sisters.</p>

<p id="id02014">"I should have been very glad to remain here with father and mother and
you," said Dunfin, "had I not promised the big, white—"</p>

<p id="id02015">"What!" shrieked Prettywing. "Are you to have the handsome
goosey-gander? Then it is—" But here Goldeye gave her a sharp nudge,
and she stopped short.</p>

<p id="id02016">The two cruel sisters had much to talk about all the afternoon. They
were furious because Dunfin had a suitor like the white goosey-gander.
They themselves had suitors, but theirs were only common gray geese,
and, since they had seen Morten Goosey-Gander, they thought them so
homely and low-bred that they did not wish even to look at them.</p>

<p id="id02017">"This will grieve me to death!" whimpered Goldeye. "If at least it had
been you, Sister Prettywing, who had captured him!"</p>

<p id="id02018">"I would rather see him dead than to go about here the entire summer
thinking of Dunfin's capturing a white goosey-gander!" pouted
Prettywing.</p>

<p id="id02019">However, the sisters continued to appear very friendly toward Dunfin,
and in the afternoon Goldeye took Dunfin with her, that she might see
the one she thought of marrying.</p>

<p id="id02020">"He's not as attractive as the one you will have," said Goldeye. "But to
make up for it, one can be certain that he is what he is."</p>

<p id="id02021">"What do you mean, Goldeye?" questioned Dunfin. At first Goldeye would
not explain what she had meant, but at last she came out with it.</p>

<p id="id02022">"We have never seen a white goose travel with wild geese," said the
sister, "and we wonder if he can be bewitched."</p>

<p id="id02023">"You are very stupid," retorted Dunfin indignantly. "He is a tame goose,
of course."</p>

<p id="id02024">"He brings with him one who is bewitched," said Goldeye, "and, under the
circumstances, he too must be bewitched. Are you not afraid that he may
be a black cormorant?" She was a good talker and succeeded in
frightening Dunfin thoroughly.</p>

<p id="id02025">"You don't mean what you are saying," pleaded the little gray goose.<br>

"You only wish to frighten me!"<br>
</p>

<p id="id02026">"I wish what is for your good, Dunfin," said Goldeye. "I can't imagine<br>

anything worse than for you to fly away with a black cormorant! But now<br>

I shall tell you something—try to persuade him to eat some of the roots<br>

I have gathered here. If he is bewitched, it will be apparent at once.<br>

If he is not, he will remain as he is."<br>
</p>

<p id="id02027">The boy was sitting amongst the wild geese, listening to Akka and the
old goose-master, when Dunfin came flying up to him. "Thumbietot,
Thumbietot!" she cried. "Morten Goosey-Gander is dying! I have killed
him!"</p>

<p id="id02028">"Let me get up on your back, Dunfin, and take me to him!" Away they
flew, and Akka and the other wild geese followed them. When they got to
the goosey-gander, he was lying prostrate on the ground. He could not
utter a word—only gasped for breath.</p>

<p id="id02029">"Tickle him under the gorge and slap him on the back!" commanded Akka.
The boy did so and presently the big, white gander coughed up a large,
white root, which had stuck in his gorge. "Have you been eating of
these?" asked Akka, pointing to some roots that lay on the ground.</p>

<p id="id02030">"Yes," groaned the goosey-gander.</p>

<p id="id02031">"Then it was well they stuck in your throat," said Akka, "for they are
poisonous. Had you swallowed them, you certainly should have died."</p>

<p id="id02032">"Dunfin bade me eat them," said the goosey-gander.</p>

<p id="id02033">"My sister gave them to me," protested Dunfin, and she told everything.</p>

<p id="id02034">"You must beware of those sisters of yours, Dunfin!" warned Akka, "for
they wish you no good, depend upon it!"</p>

<p id="id02035">But Dunfin was so constituted that she could not think evil of any one
and, a moment later, when Prettywing asked her to come and meet her
intended, she went with her immediately.</p>

<p id="id02036">"Oh, he isn't as handsome as yours," said the sister, "but he's much
more courageous and daring!"</p>

<p id="id02037">"How do you know he is?" challenged Dunfin.</p>

<p id="id02038">"For some time past there has been weeping and wailing amongst the sea
gulls and wild ducks on the island. Every morning at daybreak a strange
bird of prey comes and carries off one of them."</p>

<p id="id02039">"What kind of a bird is it?" asked Dunfin.</p>

<p id="id02040">"We don't know," replied the sister. "One of his kind has never before
been seen on the island, and, strange to say, he has never attacked one
of us geese. But now my intended has made up his mind to challenge him
to-morrow morning, and drive him away."</p>

<p id="id02041">"Oh, I hope he'll succeed!" said Dunfin.</p>

<p id="id02042">"I hardly think he will," returned the sister. "If my goosey-gander were
as big and strong as yours, I should have hope."</p>

<p id="id02043">"Do you wish me to ask Morten Goosey-Gander to meet the strange bird?"
asked Dunfin.</p>

<p id="id02044">"Indeed, I do!" exclaimed Prettywing excitedly. "You couldn't render me
a greater service."</p>

<p id="id02045">The next morning the goosey-gander was up before the sun. He stationed
himself on the highest point of the island and peered in all directions.
Presently he saw a big, dark bird coming from the west. His wings were
exceedingly large, and it was easy to tell that he was an eagle. The
goosey-gander had not expected a more dangerous adversary than an owl,
and how he understood that he could not escape this encounter with his
life. But it did not occur to him to avoid a struggle with a bird who
was many times stronger than himself.</p>

<p id="id02046">The great bird swooped down on a sea gull and dug his talons into it.
Before the eagle could spread his wings, Morten Goosey-Gander rushed up
to him. "Drop that!" he shouted, "and don't come here again or you'll
have me to deal with!" "What kind of a lunatic are you?" said the eagle.
"It's lucky for you that I never fight with geese, or you would soon be
done for!"</p>

<p id="id02047">Morten Goosey-Gander thought the eagle considered himself too good to
fight with him and flew at him, incensed, biting him on the throat and
beating him with his wings. This, naturally, the eagle would not
tolerate and he began to fight, but not with his full strength.</p>

<p id="id02048">The boy lay sleeping in the quarters where Akka and the other wild geese
slept, when Dunfin called: "Thumbietot, Thumbietot! Morten Goosey-Gander
is being torn to pieces by an eagle."</p>

<p id="id02049">"Let me get up on your back, Dunfin, and take me to him!" said the boy.</p>

<p id="id02050">When they arrived on the scene Morten Goosey-Gander was badly torn, and
bleeding, but he was still fighting. The boy could not battle with the
eagle; all that he could do was to seek more efficient help.</p>

<p id="id02051">"Hurry, Dunfin, and call Akka and the wild geese!" he cried. The instant
he said that, the eagle flew back and stopped fighting.</p>

<p id="id02052">"Who's speaking of Akka?" he asked. He saw Thumbietot and heard the wild
geese honking, so he spread his wings.</p>

<p id="id02053">"Tell Akka I never expected to run across her or any of her flock out
here in the sea!" he said, and soared away in a rapid and graceful
flight.</p>

<p id="id02054">"That is the self-same eagle who once brought me back to the wild
geese," the boy remarked, gazing after the bird in astonishment.</p>

<p id="id02055">The geese had decided to leave the island at dawn, but first they wanted
to feed awhile. As they walked about and nibbled, a mountain duck came
up to Dunfin.</p>

<p id="id02056">"I have a message for you from your sisters," said the duck. "They dare
not show themselves among the wild geese, but they asked me to remind
you not to leave the island without calling on the old fisherman."</p>

<p id="id02057">"That's so!" exclaimed Dunfin, but she was so frightened now that she
would not go alone, and asked the goosey-gander and Thumbietot to
accompany her to the hut.</p>

<p id="id02058">The door was open, so Dunfin entered, but the others remained outside.<br>

After a moment they heard Akka give the signal to start, and called<br>

Dunfin. A gray goose came out and flew with the wild geese away from the<br>

island.<br>
</p>

<p id="id02059">They had travelled quite a distance along the archipelago when the boy
began to wonder at the goose who accompanied them. Dunfin always flew
lightly and noiselessly, but this one laboured with heavy and noisy
wing-strokes. "We are in the wrong company. It is Prettywing that
follows us!"</p>

<p id="id02060">The boy had barely spoken when the goose uttered such an ugly and angry
shriek that all knew who she was. Akka and the others turned to her, but
the gray goose did not fly away at once. Instead she bumped against the
big goosey-gander, snatched Thumbietot, and flew off with him in her
bill.</p>

<p id="id02061">There was a wild chase over the archipelago. Prettywing flew fast, but
the wild geese were close behind her, and there was no chance for her to
escape.</p>

<p id="id02062">Suddenly they saw a puff of smoke rise up from the sea, and heard an
explosion. In their excitement they had not noticed that they were
directly above a boat in which a lone fisherman was seated.</p>

<p id="id02063">However, none of the geese was hurt; but just there, above the boat,<br>

Prettywing opened her bill and dropped Thumbietot into the sea.<br>
</p>

</section></body></html>
